SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 200
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
THE FUTURE OF DATA SCIENCE |
SPEAKERS MASHUP EDITION

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

Welcome to the Super Data Science Podcast, episode number 200. Welcome
back, ladies and gentlemen to the Super Data Science Podcast, and today is
our anniversary, episode number 200. How crazy is that? It feels just like
not that long ago, we started this whole show but it's actually been two
years.
Been over two years since we started the podcast and I'd like to say a huge
thank you for all of you for being part of the show. It's been an amazing
journey and in order to commemorate this very special 200th episode, we
decided to double down on a very pressing topic.
On a topic that is all over the planet, that is affecting every industry, every
business and very soon is going to be affecting every single person on this
globe. And you're right, you guessed it. That topic is artificial intelligence.
So in today's show, you will hear what artificial intelligence is all about and
what the future of data science looks like according to the top AI experts
that we've interviewed in the past. To do this, we've created a special
mashup, or you may call it a recap episode with our 16 biggest AI experts.
That's right. We took the top 16 AI experts that have been on this show and
have put together their thoughts into this one episode. So I can't wait for
you to check it out and without further ado, please enjoy Double Down on
Artificial Intelligence.
Today, we had a very special guest, Ulf Morys, who is the Finance Director
of the German branch of the game design development and distribution
company, Ubisoft. Now, I'm sure you've heard of Ubisoft before. They're the
maker of such game brands like Watchdogs, Assassins Creed and Far Cry.
So as you can imagine, this is a huge company, it's a huge name in the
world of computer games.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

From what you've seen and what you've learned about data science, where
do you think this field is going in the future, in the coming years?
Tools will get easier to handle, so there will be a sort of democratization of
data science, certainly. So there's a huge chance also for the vendor
companies, like you mentioned, Tableau and what I personally got very
endeared with digging into data science, was, of course, open source
software because both R and Python are open source and I just find it
incredible, the quality of support that you're getting when you're having
questions, for example. It's just amazing.
So I think data science, we will also advance the cause of open source
software to a certain extent. But to answer your question then, where do I
think what we had with data science in the near and medium future, in the
narrow professional sense or really concentrating just on finance, I would
say it will really help to what we said previously, separate permanently,
data from the data processing logic to get rid of this mess that Excel is
making.
When you take it to a bigger scale, it will help to combine more
systematically the use of data analytics techniques and data visualization
for really the discovery of patterns and rules in your data, which is like by
my previous example of what I said, do some predictions like, “Where do I
invest my money? Is this customer better than this customer?" And I have
more than just the guts feeling to base my decision on.
Ultimately for me because it's really the most important part, I think of the
traditional finance role in an operative company. Not on a corporate level,
that well, that too, but it's still different. But on the operative level, the
planning process is really important because you always ... I mean, you
need to know where you want to be tomorrow and integrating predictive
methods into concrete plannings of costs and especially revenues, will
become paramount.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

If you really focus on the financial function, I think this is where data
science can really improve things and will play a major role, but if you take
it to a larger sense, data science, the most intriguing field right now and I
don't think you can make a huge mistake. Learning about it is
unsupervised learning because it's like again, I only have the theory really.
But I mean, the difference is, of course, with supervised learning, you need
to know the outcome. You need to have a training data set, and with
unsupervised learning, you just learn structures from data by itself.
So it's Sui generis, they would say in Latin, as also from your own origin.
The data structure emerges from nothing. Te very simple fact is that as
soon as you leave the field of structured data in NLP systems and if you
enter the field of big data from resources as disparate as let's say, Facebook
entries, tweets of feedbacks from websites, commentaries and so forth, you
just end up with so much more unstructured data and any tool that will
allow you to have structure emerged from initially unstructured data will be
enormously important and helpful.
Today, I've got one of the top students of super data science, Garth Zoller.
From where you are now, from what you're learning about data science or
from how far you've gotten into the field, from what you see now, where do
you think the field of data science is going and what would you recommend
to our listeners to look into, to prepare for the future of data science?
Based on what I've seen and what I'm getting a sense of is, it feels very
much like the late '90s, early 2000s, with the technology boom that
happened at that time, that was largely centered around network
administration and system administration.
That's where data science is to me, today, in the industry. It is the thing
and what to me is a little different about data science compared to that
earlier time, that earlier time was about the hardware or the software.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

Data Science, yeah, we have some tools, but it's really, again, about that
way of thinking about problems and being disciplined in how you create
little miniature of quick experiments to vet out proof points of whether
something is valid or statistically meaningful.
That extends well beyond a tool and well beyond a particular timeframe. To
me is more like maybe personal computers way back when they started.
Can you really get sustainable employment if you don't have some basic
computer skills today? It's going to be difficult.
Data science to me is like that going forward. It will be the differentiator
between organizations. The organizations that have a deep concentrated
knowledge of data science skills are going to have a competitive advantage
and whatever you're doing, even if you're not a data scientist, maybe you're
a people manager or whatever else, applying data science to what you do
will differentiate you from your peers.
It ultimately always affects the relationship you have with your customer.
You're able to create more authentic and provable relationship, giving them
exactly what they need based on the data and also driving the bottom line.
Today we have a unique episode because we have a very special guest,
Damian Mingle. Damian is the Chief Data Scientist at WPC Healthcare, but
not only that, he's also a speaker and author and he has been ranked in
the top 1% of data scientists across the whole world by Kaggle.
"From where you stand and from all of your experience, where would you
say you think the field of data science is going and what should our
listeners look out for, to prepare for data science in the future?
I think more and more of what will come is more of the automation. There
has been a real big emphasis on the fact that there's not a lot of data
scientists out there, which I don't know, maybe that's true, maybe that's
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

not true. At least that's what the media is saying. So there's a scarcity and
there's a need to create some synthetic or artificial data scientist.
So some of what we do can be automated, absolutely. I think we'll see more
of that come into our wheelhouse, if you will, and that could be a good
thing. It's much like if we take our own medicine, like we were talking about
with the doctor, maybe there's some things we don't necessarily want to do
in data science, and there's other things that we're interested in doing.
I think there'll probably be three major things that will show up in the next
maybe five years. One is, can you ... as a way to prevent being automated
out of data science, I think you'd have to think along the lines of, “Can I
convert a business problem into a data science problem?”
Right now, you think about IBM Watson and some of these other big
cognitive platforms are really great, it's really exciting times. But there's a
couple hangups. One is, if you can't get the data to them, they can't do any
of that stuff. So sharing out how to get to your data, that's the new
bottleneck. It's not crunch time on the numbers and that sort of thing.
That's gonna be an interesting thing to overcome.
The other thing is trying to create targets. We talked about creating data
science solutions for business problems. If you don't know how to create a
target, something you want to predict, that's not obvious, I think that you
will have a difficult time in the future with data science. I think that'll
become ... I really think ... and even in a meeting on your own, depending
on what your role is with the company, thinking through, “How would I
make this a data science problem?" is a good mental experiment that you
can do. You never have to share it with anybody, but it's a way for you to
start doing some brain training on how to think machine learning in the
world. And that's very, very powerful.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

If you can't implement these data science solutions, I think that'll be
another struggle. That other third one, which I think is going to be
everybody's future field day, if you have the IBM's of the world and some of
these other data science players come in and they start automating the ...
it's going to sit everybody's floor, let's call it 80% area under the curve.
The new gold will be trying to move it from 80% to 85, 86, 87%. So you're
going to have developed techniques on future engineering and how to work
with data and some of the stuff we talked about sub-setting, subspace,
ensemble, all these sorts of things, to be able to get yourself the lift that you
need because today, people would pay from going from 50 to 85%. That's
huge. That means lots of money and a lot of cases, a lot of saved lives.
In the future, I think you'll see those margins shrink or there's percents
shrink, but they're still gonna want to pay for them.
Today, I've got a very exciting guest with me, Sinan Ozdemir, who is an
author, a head instructor of data science at the General Assembly and the
founder of Legion Analytics.
Where do you think the field of data science is going and what should our
listeners prepare for to be ready for the future that's coming?
That is a big one. I think that the future of data science, the future of
machine learning and AI ... I'm gonna piggy back off of a previous answer
that I had and say, the future of data science won't necessarily be in the
most innovative software technologies but what it's going to be, is the ability
to apply these technologies to fields that have not been updated, in some
cases centuries.
I think that to prepare yourselves, listeners, to prepare yourselves, as you're
learning data science, as you're listening to a lecture on Chi Square tests or
listening about Pandas or data frames or data manipulation. As you're
learning this, never ever forget why or how you're going to use this
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

information. Never get lost in the theory or even in the practice, but always
keep yourself grounded by saying, "You know what, my wife's shop uses
data and I think they're using it incorrectly. How can I bring this to them or
my buddy is starting a vineyard and I want to be able to use image
recognition to help them know when their yields are coming in or when
their yields are good or bad."
So always remember, you can apply this not necessarily to the most ... Uber
or Tesla, SpaceX, Solar City, not even to the most innovative companies,
but never forget that there is a plethora of SMBs, smaller to medium sized
companies who could also use this technology.
Wonderful. Love that answer. And yeah, it definitely ... that's something
we've already discussed a bit and it's good to reiterate that. Always look out
for where you can apply the knowledge that you're learning.
Today, we've got an interesting guestToday, We've got Kimberly Diaz joining us and Kimberly is using data
science for something very, very noble. Kimberly is a data analyst in the
space of medical research and she uses data science to help provide
healthcare and support services for individuals living with HIV and Aids.
From where you are and I think it is your answer is actually gonna be very
valuable to lots of all our listeners because you are in a very different space,
you're in biology or in medicine and a lot of our guests, very few of us are
operating in that space.
So the question is, from where you are and from what you've seen about
data science, where do you think this field is going? So what'd you think is
coming for the world in terms of data science and in specifically in your
profession and what would you say listeners need to prepare for to look out
for the future, so that they can build their careers in that space or just be
prepared for what's coming in terms of data and medicine?
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

So, I think one of the bigger, more significant applications of data science in
terms of medicine, is that information that is collected about you on the
data side can be used to ... from anything, from collecting genomic data can
be used to determine which drugs will better treat your cancer, from coming
from HIV, what areas of the county should we be looking forward to see the
next outbreak of a certain disease.
So I think in medicine, the sky's the limit in terms of how useful it can be in
and ultimately with the goal of saving people's lives and improving people's
lives who are dealing with diseases which can many times be fatal. So that's
the biggest thing that I see, data science being able to use in the medical
space, is that it has an overall goal of improving care.
I think one of the challenges to data science being applied heavily in the
field of medicine is that oftentimes people are reluctant to change and that
there is a big learning curve with it. I'm seeing that a lot with the
implementation of various EMRs in hospital settings, that there is a
learning curve involved with learning how to properly use an EMR, EHR to
document information in the chart for a patient, but I think that the overall
goal of saving lives and decreasing healthcare costs makes it a challenge
that's worth people in that profession and in that space meeting.
So I guess that's my comment about medicine and data science. I think the
sky's the limit, I think ultimately will improve the health of people and that
will ultimately drive costs down. At least, that's the hope.
Yeah, I totally agree with you andToday we have Josh Colson, who is my friend back from the Deloitte today.
So back in 2012, we met and we did some work together and then he
moved on to a new role at LinkedIn and he's been there ever since and he's
really grown in the team.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

He's actually now a manager there and has a team of his own and manages
a huge part of the insights team of LinkedIn for Asia Pacific, where he helps
employers find the right talent for their organizations and understand how
to go by.
From where you sit, from all the things you see about data, you have a
team, you worked at LinkedIn, you have so much access to data. You
actually have this bird's eye view of what's going on in the world. Where do
you think the field of data science is going and what should our listeners
prepare for coming in the future?
I think I mentioned earlier. Every organization in the world who hasn't ...
who sees that data is part of the value that they create, is going to continue
to see that data as more valuable to their bottom line.
I think the real challenge for data science in the near term is connecting
with the business and really focusing on measuring their impact and
making sure that the models that they're putting in place, the algorithms
that they're driving, they are driving real revenue and bottom line profit and
it's all about ...
And that's it. Really, I think that's the biggest trend that's happening right
now. I think the data scientists that will be the most valued are the ones
that have already been able to build a brand for themselves because they
have to live it success to businesses and I'm thinking the same way that a
private equity and venture capitalists provide value by stripping companies
and turning every company and that kind of thing. I think data scientists
will build personal brands based on the work that they can do with
organizations to reinforce the top line and bottom line.
We've got a very interesting guest today. Today we're talking with David
Venturi and David is a fascinating person because he, at some point in his
life, understood that he wants to study data science. He wants to be a data
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

scientist and he actually enrolled in one of the prestigious universities in
Canada for a data science degree, for a data science masters.
But within two weeks of studying there, he dropped out and he didn't drop
out because he was not satisfied with his career choice and he wanted to do
something else. No, he dropped out because he realized that what he was
learning wasn't sufficient enough, and guess what he did instead? Instead,
he created his own masters program based on courses available online.
So he looked at different data science masters programs that are offered by
different universities, then based on that, he compiled his own program
using the courses that he can purchase or find for free online. I thought
that it was an ingenious idea. It saved him $30,000. And also, of course, he
was free to pick the best quality of content that was available to him.
Where do you think this whole field is going? What are the most important
things people should focus on to prepare themselves for the future of data
science coming in two, three, five years from now?
Yeah, so one thing that I'm currently working on and that I didn't realize
this is really important going in, is the software engineering aspect; being
able to make your code reproducible and it happened the best practices for
testing or testing your code and debugging all of the software engineering
skills that I think a lot of new data scientists may not have, going in, if you
didn't study computer science for example.
So that maybe not ... that may not be what the future is, but I think that's
a really important part that can be overlooked.
Today, we've got a very interesting guest. Today, we've got the founder and
Co- CEO of Experfy, Harpreet Singh.
The other interesting question I had as well, which I'd really be curious to
get your opinion on is, from where you sit, from all the things that you see
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

going on in the space of data science, where do you think this field is going
and what should our listeners prepare for to be ready for the data science of
2020 or the data science of 2025? What would you recommend for them?
So, yeah, I know this field is changing so rapidly that it would be a fool's
errand to make many predictions but one thing is for sure, that there is a
lot of automation going on.
We have a lot of tools that are developing and that are being developed
rather and this is going to be a very exciting space and it's going to impact
every industry and the industries that are going to see the most change are
the ones that have the best data or the richness of data.
So those we will see evolving much faster than the others. If you are in such
an industry, then I think it's a very good idea to embrace analytics. Even if
you're not a data scientist, even if you're a manager, understanding how
one can become data driven, how processes can benefit from different types
of analysis is really important.
Making sure that the company has some kind of a data strategy to capture
the right data is another important consideration because companies that
are not going to do that are frankly going to be ... they're not going to be
very competitive. They probably won't even exist in the next five, 10 years.
It's a bold assumption but if we look at how many fortune 500 companies
exist from the last century, let's say 1950s, I would say at least 30 or 40
have disappeared. So I think companies that do take data science seriously
are the ones that are going to stick around.
Yup. Yup. Totally agree with you and that's some very interesting advice
and overview of what to expect and you're totally right. It's evolving so
quickly. It's hard to make very definitive predictions, but very interesting
what you said about automation and that managers should also look into
data science and I totally agree with you that there's even some predictions
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

that out of the fortune 500 companies, over half of them will disappear in
the next decade just because of what's happening in the space of data
sciences; what's going on, so it's a huge disruptor as well as an enabler for
companies.
Today we've got a very interesting guest, Deblina Bhattacharjee. She is
calling in from Seoul, which is South Korea and she is an AI researcher
working at one of the universities there or doing her degree at one of the
universities there.
From what you've seen around the world and from the research you've
done, what do you think the future is of artificial intelligence?
As far as I know and also from the opinions of the scientists and
researchers with whom I met in the conferences around the world, what all
of us we think is the field of data sciences headed towards a fusion with
intelligent systems to create smarter cities of the future. That's the main
vision.
So I also strongly believe that with the ongoing research with real time, big
data and Internet of everything right now, data science is going to explode
in the future.
With a lot of stuff happening, the thing is that as of today, in the morning
when I got up, I just read this, "Strata and Scalar, they have been replaced
by Hadoop already and ... sorry, Strata and Scalar have replaced Hadoop
and there have beenJust a bit of a different direction.
... and there are the data Ops tools which are being developed to help data
engineers like a DevOps tools which used to be previously for the
developers, now they are data Ops and they have been built by companies
like Nexla and Data Kitchen and it's really great how data field is
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

progressing and also the automated predictive analytics, which is like the
thing which is happening right now.
So this predictive analytics had been automated last year and the data
robot was created and people were like, "okay, so by 2025, everyone is going
to be out of jobs." But then it was a bit too soon to say because the data
robot as now, it's just speeds up the model development for any model that
you're building and it's the one stop solution to speed up whatever you're
implementing in the industry.
So it has a long way to go, definitely. It's a budding field. So both AI and
data science together, it's going to be really powerful in the future.
Yeah, we've got Urie Suhr on the show and the Urie is in the short, a
headhunter. She's the director of talent acquisition for collective[i] which is
a data science company which uses artificial intelligence and predictive
analytics to help their clients with things like sales, CRM and creating a
better customer journey.
From what you've seen from all the work you've done, the work you do and
the candidates you've seen and the job descriptions, where do you think the
field of data science is going and what should our listeners prepare for in
order to be ready for the future?
This is a tough question, so I truly feel that the title of data analytics or
data analyst is probably going to go away in the near future. I think that it
will soon be replaced by a traditional data scientist and a lot of data
scientists are now moving more into the deep learning space and towards AI
and machine learning.
So I think it's really important to always make sure that you have the ear
on the ground and recognize what's going around as far as not just what's
trending but what makes sense as far as where the momentum is going,
when we talk about just the world of data.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

What I find really interesting currently right now is that data science is
almost becoming interconnected with big data. I mean it all still isn't in the
data family, but it's almost becoming ... I'm seeing more and more cross
pollination between the intersection of big data and data science.
So there have been very interesting candidates that I can give an example
that I've seen that maybe they were more of a Hadoop developer or working
more on Cloud and things like that of that nature and being more on the
engineering side, now migrating over to the data science field. Then also,
same thing. I see a lot of data scientists now ramping up on technology
such as Spark and so forth. Being able to really be more connected on the
big data side of things. That wheelhouse.
... inspiring new guest on the show. Matt Dancho is the founder of Business
Science Consulting Firm in the space of data science which works with
companies ranging from startups to fortune 500 companies. Not only is
Matt the founder of businesses, but also he's the author of multiple R
packages, so just tidyquants to empty case, we put table time and others.
Philosophical question; from what you've seen in data science and from the
way it's evolved, where do you think this field is going and what should our
listeners look into to prepare for the future?
So in terms of the field of data science, I think we're still just in the
beginning with it. We've got a lot of tools that are evolving and I think we're
gonna to be going more towards automated tools like I love what H2O is
doing right now with actually making it easier to get these high accuracy
models now.
So where I really see the benefit is in a different part of data science, which
is actually communication. We talked a little bit about Shiny web
applications. I really see that as being a huge benefit for businesses. That's

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

something that at Business Science, we're actively investing a lot of time
into.
Some of our first projects ... actually, I think our first five projects with the
client were Shiny web apps, but it's being able to distribute analytics
interactively. So you've got a machine learning algorithm, you're trying to
forecast something or you're trying to predict whether an employee is going
to churn, you have to have a way to distribute that information to
nontechnical people in a wide audience and I think Shiny is the way to do
that or at least one of the ways. You've got Power BI, Tablo, as other that,
Carl, you had mentioned.
I really see that as the future of data science, as being both good at the
tools, understanding you need them to know the tools inside and out and
understand them. I think the tools are going to get easier to use, but I think
down the road, what's really going to become very powerful is being able to
communicate that data in a interactive way.
Gotcha. Awesome. Thank you. That's a very apt answer. Sums it up very
nicely and I totally agree with what people should be looking into to become
super powerful data scientists and change the world.
Just got off the phone with a senior data scientist at LinkedIn, Eric Weber,
and we had a great chat. Really, really enjoyed the chat.
From what you're seeing in data science and education and from all the
experiences you've had and where you stand now, where do you think the
whole field of data science is going and what should our listeners prepare
for to be ready for the future that's coming?
This is a tough question. In terms of where it's going, I think we're going to
see some radical changes as companies start reckoning the investments
that they've made in data science and by that I mean, some companies are
going to decide that they haven't seen a return on investment and I think in
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

a lot of cases it's because maybe they're not measuring the right thing, but
you're going to see other companies that decide to double down and say,
"Okay, we really need to take seriously how we're measuring the impact of
our data scientists on this organization."
So to me, what the near future feels like is really developing proof of
concept for really looking at ROI of data scientists, really turning the data
science on to the actual data scientists, "How are you going to measure
your value for us? How are you going to test your value for us?" And that's
a question I think we're going to have to answer.
To this point I think, data science being the sexy career and having high
salaries and all of this stuff, that's great, but companies at the end of the
day are business and they need to see the lift and the amount of
improvement they get from adding data sciences, and to me that's a near
term thing. That's something that a lot of companies will be grappling with.
And the thing to me, where we're going, I mentioned scalability at the start
of the conversation.
Scalability is a big deal. I continue to not sometimes care if someone can
eek out an extra 0.1% of performance in their model and I'd rather see them
be able to scale and productionize their model so that we don't have to rely
on someone maintaining it over time, so that we can actually build it to deal
with the size of the data that we have.
This is an issue that we see at LinkedIn, but it's not unique to LinkedIn.
The volume of data is not going to decrease. The speed at which it comes in
is not going to slow down all of a sudden and so I think really dealing with
scalability, that is a big issue to grapple with here in the near future.
We have got a super exciting, super prompt episode, super futuristic
episode with Andrew Borysov from the MMOne project.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

From everything that you've seen so far, where do you think the space of
data science is going? Spaces of data science, AI, machine learning is going
and what'd you think our listeners should prepare for to be ready for the
future that's coming?
I don't think it's gonna make sense for me to talk about different areas
where data science could be applied in particular and only like legal or
everything about the images and how you process them.
So I would speak more philosophical in general. One day, we're going to
come to the ... I'm sorry for calling it like this but 'matrix', in some kind of
way, maybe not the way the brothers described it.
What I mean is that people spend less and less time offline and more online
and it's gonna be even more. Even now in the United States, there is a big
problem. A lot of shopping malls are shutting down and there is nothing
that people are intended to do with this big amount of space.
So people will get even deeper into virtual world since this is where we are
as play and when you have the virtual world, you need to have artificial
brain there that can talk to you, that you can do something about, I mean
talk to another person in this world and so on.
This is where the data science approaches need to be implemented in one
way or another? So I'm thinking more globally about this.
Yeah, no, that's a very ...
Decimal part?
... accurate picture.
Yeah. So, and the other part is of course billions of people one day losing
their jobs simply because, let's call this computure.
Yeah, we'll do it ...
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

I'm excited about this episode because I have the legend of data science,
Eugene Dubossarsky on the show. And legend is in no way, not even the
slightest and overstatement because Eugene is indeed regarded as a
thought leader in the space of data science indefinitely in Australia that I
can tell you for sure and I would even go as far as saying across the world,
across the Globe.
Eugene is a person who started multiple companies and has participated in
multiple companies in the space of data science. Just recently started
Advantage Data. It's a world class data science consulting firm that works
with C-level executives and CEOs.
He's also the director and principal trainer at Prescient Analytics. He's the
head founder of Data Science Sydney and he's also the Chief Data Scientist
at Alpha Zeta and Global Network of Data Science Consultants.
So this one we kind of touched on as well, but maybe a summary would be
great. Where do you think the field of data science is going and what should
our listeners look into to prepare for the future that's coming?
Well, I think there's gun for a data literacy, a general data literacy, which
means the more demanding clientele in the buying side of the market.
Something I'm betting on very heavily at the moment and also we
mentioned before is quantum computing. So Presciient has a quantum
computing course coming out and there'll be more quantum computing
offerings and material from Presciient and Advantage Data in the near
future.
Like I said, I think statistics is key. I think getting a good grounding in
statistics is the most important thing of all. I find people, mentorees, come
and say, "Which data science and Masters course should I do?" And I say
do a Masters in statistics. And once again, basing in statistics, in
particular, causal impact analysis, you can't go wrong with those.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

I'm still wondering what sort of machine learning tools and what sort of
mathematical tools are going to come to the forefront now that quantum
computing is on the verge of becoming mature technology.
So yeah, I'd say statistics, statistics, I'd say do Kaggle competitions.
Especially if you're a beginner, just do them incessantly. If your question is,
"Shouldn't we learn Python or R?" It's the wrong question in two ways. One
is, the language is the least important thing, Focus on the methods. Two is,
you should learn both of them. You should probably have a look of Julia as
well.
I think curiosity, entrepreneurship and rigor, which is a very rare
combination, those personality traits. With those personality traits, it's
going to be key. I think being experimental, this one is a real problem for a
lot of people.
So one of the ways in which data science is so unlike IT is data science is
about experimenting. It's about trying though you'll fail, about not knowing
what you're going find until you get there and that's a huge challenge for a
lot of people, both from the executive side of the world and the IT side of the
world.
So dealing with being comfortable with uncertainty and being comfortable
with uncertainty about your own career. No one knows what a data science
career path looks like. No one knows what it's going to be like in the future.
So it's having a certain courage, a sort of comfort.
We've got a super energetic guest for you, Josie [inaudible 00:39:50] So
what do you need to know about Josie is that he's a serial entrepreneur
who uses data and technology in his businesses. So Josie is involved in
initiatives such as metal roofs, construction, designer glass specialties and
others.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

At the same time, he actively leverages data science to improve the way he
approaches his customers, the way he sells to his customers, the way he
services his customers. And he's seen massive success from that initial.
What do you see the future looking like and where do you think the world's
going? What should our listeners prepare for that's coming in the next five
or 10 years? What do you think the world of data and technology will be
like?
So I do think it's a bit scary with the ... like here recently, some Toyota
engineers, they built a robot that can beat any player, any statistic on
shots. It made 100% accuracy; free throws, three pointers.
So data scientists are getting very, very good at creating this AI. So there's
going to come to a point where it's gonna start pushing us out, but that's
where we have to create new ways because God has given us this mind and
this ability and so we have been amazing opportunity to leverage that.
I do think certain aspects of it are scary, but I think it's going to be one of
the most amazing opportunities for those that focus on creating and not
getting bogged down in looking at the dark side of it, but keep the mind
positive and make sure ... and to use that except as poison or fuel.
And so when you see things that are coming in scary, that are like, "Oh
man, where am I going to be? How am I going to do that?" Use that as fuel
and not poison, and so I really think that the future is a ... we're going to
work hand in hand with bots and I mean, we're gonna have a lot of
sophisticated things within our life.
Everything is going to have a sensor on it. And we're really focused on the
Internet of moving things. That's gonna be a big part of our lives or we're
going to have technology always around us and I'm not ... my wife started
me in Instagram. I've never had a Facebook ... I'm really not one that likes
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

to consume except Flipboard. I love consuming Flipboard because it's
amazing and it gives me a lot articles I really like.
But just finding those things that help you be the best you and that is going
to help you to create the best products and services. So whatever you
consume is what you're creating from, so you have to be very, very safe with
what ... safeguard your mind, safeguard what comes in.
If you catch yourself just consuming stuff that you know is not producing
good results, cut it out and do ... be self disciplined and really focus on that
and don't limit yourself because it's an unlimited world out there, especially
with the skills that you have.
Today ... energetic guest on the show today, Lucy [D’Agostino Montgalen
00:43:19]. Lucy is a person of many, many, different talents and different
skills. So what you need to know about Lucy is that she started off by
studying a Bachelors in Religious Studies and Italian, right after that she
has successfully switched her career into data science. She's just completed
a PHD in Biostatistics. She also runs the 'Our Ladies' group in Nashville,
Tennessee.
As we talk about that for today, what sort of is ... from your perspective,
from all of the things you've seen, we've covered so many topics just even in
just this podcast and I'm sure you have a much broader exposure to the
field in general.
From everything you've seen, where do you think the field of data science is
going and what should our listeners prepare for to be ready for the future
that's coming ahead in the next three to five years?
Yeah, that's a great question. So I think in general, we're moving to that age
of information overload, which has two consequences for data scientists. So
the first, I think, is largely really a good thing.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

So when I see a study now, I want to know exactly where the data came
from and how it's analyzed. And often if it's something that I actually think
is important to me, I want to be able to reproduce the results. I see this
more and more of this craving for even more information even though we're
in this information overload space, because we have the ability to share
information so easily and I think it's really cool and it's leading to really
neat innovations.
What it means as data scientists, is that we're really pushed to use best
practices in terms of reproducibility so that this can be possible. So things
like version control and working in a scripting language instead of the gooey
and documenting and justifying data changes and all that kind of stuff.
I think it's becoming increasingly important because we have this ability to
transfer information so easily. Then the second consequence of data or
information overload, it would be that it can be hard ... this reflects on what
I was saying earlier, but I think it can be hard for the general public to be
able to sift through what's important and what's noise.
So I think that means that as data scientists, we need to brush up on our
communication skills and being able to distill really complex things, this
really complex model that I've just had ... fully documented it for those
people that want to be able to reproduce it. I also need to be able to
condense it into a digestible sound bite that doesn't water it down, but also
doesn't overload the public with unnecessary information.
So that's kind of what you were saying before about being able to make it
exciting and interesting, but somehow still hold onto the truth that comes
from it, being able to make sure that for communicating things that are
both true and also important and not being able to sift through all of the
nitty gritty, they get it. They condense down to the single point that we're
trying to get across and I think that is also going to be really important in
the coming years for data scientists to be able to gain that skill.
http://www.superdatascience.com/200

So aside from being able to fit that really fancy model, being able to explain
it in a really easily digestible way so that people can actually utilize the
information that you gleaned from it.
There we go. That was something special, wasn't it? 16 views of our 16
biggest AI experts who were on the show talking about what the future of
data science looks like.
I hope you enjoyed and learned tons from this very special 200th episode of
the Super Data science Podcast. Here's to another 200 episodes yet to
come. I can't wait to interview more guests and to share their thoughts,
their ideas, their perspectives with you and thank you so much for being
part of this journey, for being part of the Super Data Science Show.
Couldn't have done it without you and I'm so, so excited and so grateful
that you are part of all of this that we do here, that you inspire us, inspire
our guests to keep sharing their thoughts and ideas.
Thank you once again and I can't wait to see you next week. And until then,
happy analyzing.

http://www.superdatascience.com/200

