SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 190
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
SEE YOU IN SAN
DIEGO

http://www.superdatascience.com/190

This is episode number 190 See You in San Diego.
Hello, and welcome back to the Super Data Science Podcast. Very excited to
have you on board. As you know, I very highly appreciate and value
honesty, so I'm gonna be extremely transparent with you guys. This episode
is about Data Science Go, about our event which we are running in San
Diego for the second time this year. It's happening October 12, 13, 14.
We're gonna talk about some very interesting things. We're gonna talk
about the speakers, the different learning tracks that we have, some of the
content that's there, and why I personally think that you should come and
what value you will get out of this event.
Having said that, if you definitely think that there's no way on planet Earth
that you're going to attend Data Science Go, then I don't wanna waste your
time. Probably skip this episode. I'll see you back here on the podcast in
our next episode.
On the other hand, if there's a chance that you're coming to Data Science
Go ... if you're still on the fence, if you're thinking about attending the
conference, or if you just wanna learn what are some of the most exciting
topics or exciting people that you could potentially meet at Data Science
Go, or you maybe can follow them on LinkedIn and other places and learn
about these topics other places ... then stick around and let's dive straight
into it. I'll walk you through what we are creating for you in October this
year.
All right, so let's get started. We'll talk about the learning tracks. Right
away, let's get that part sorted and then we'll move on to the speakers and
the content.
In terms of the learning tracks, we've got three learning tracks. They're
called the beginner, the practitioner, and leader. They are specifically
designed for you to have a personalized experience at the event. The thing
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

is, we have a main room and then we have a breakout room. Last year, we
just had one room. This year, we have a main room and a breakout room
because we're growing and we want to have more speakers, we want to
create an opportunity for you to pick where you want to go.
These learning tracks, they are ready designed in a way that you can just
look at the learning track and see where it [commands 00:02:17] for you to
know which room to be in, so that you can get the most out of this event.
The learning track will give you that recommendation based on where you
are in your career or in your role, in terms of data science. The three tracks
that we have are the beginner track is designed for data scientists who are
starting out. This might be your first year as a data scientist or, you might
be looking to get a job in data science, you might be looking to see what
kind of potential career you might have, you might be transitioning from a
different field ... you might be coming from business intelligence or
reporting or you might be coming from development as a developer ... into
data science. You want to change your career, but at the same time,
leverage your existing experience.
Or, you might be just coming fresh out of university and you've heard that
this is an amazing, exciting field and you want to come into this field. Also,
last year, we had some people who came from absolutely unrelated fields,
but have also heard about data science and they want to come in to data
science. They want to leverage this field.
That is the beginner path. In that case, the beginner path is for you.
The practitioner path, or learning track, is for those of you who are already
experienced data scientists, already practicing data science. For instance,
you already have one, two, three, five, even maybe more years of experience
in data science roles. It's hard to have more than 10 because the field has
only been around for that long. However many years experience you have in
data science, you already know how your career is shaping up, you know
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

where you want to go, but at the same time, you wanna learn some new
skills, some new techniques, meet some new people, get some exciting tools
that you might be able to commence in your career and really propel the
value that you add to your work that way.
That's what the practitioner path is all about.
Finally, the leader path, that is a path for business executives,
entrepreneurs, directors, people who are looking to build a data science
team, people who are looking to improve their data science teams, and so
on.
That is the leader path and we also notice that there was quite some
demand last year in that space. That's why we've created the leader path.
There you go. You can see that whether you're a beginner, an experienced
data scientist, or a data science leader, we've got an exciting track prepared
for you.
Now, with having said that in mind, let's look at some of the exciting
speakers that are coming to Data Science Go. We've got, for instance, Tarry
Singh, who is CEO and founder of DeepKapha.ai. An influencer and
thought leader in the space of data science and he's flying all the way from
Europe to come to Data Science Go. Also, Nadieh Bremer, who's a renown
data visualization designer. She's got a website visualcinnamon.com. She's
coming to Data Science Go, as well from Europe. Ben Taylor's coming from
Utah. He's the Chief AI Officer at ZIFF, Inc. He's coming to Data Science Go
for the second time. Also, you may have seen his very popular post on
LinkedIn, which is Data Scientist Type E. If you haven't, highly recommend
reading it. It changed my life, back in the day.
We've also got three more influencers in the space of data science. You may
have heard these names. Eric Weber, Randy Lao, Favio Vazquez ... All
coming together in one room to be here at Data Science Go. They're all
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

doing talks and we'll talk about this in a second. But, if you follow them, if
you've heard of them, this is your opportunity to meet them and network
with them and get to know them better and in person.
Plus, we've got lots of other speakers as well. People flying in from all over
the world, from Italy, Germany, lots of speakers from the U.S. We've also
got Matt Dancho coming. Sinan Ozdemir coming, along with [Hadelin
00:06:18] are doing special workshops, which come just before the event on
the Friday, which you can also find out about on our website
datasciencego.com. Of course, I'm going to be doing a talk.
I also wanted to mention Pablos Holman, who is our keynote speaker.
Pablos joined our conference just recently, like a couple months ago. We
added Pablos to the event and here's some interesting facts. Pablos Holman
is a hacker, inventor, entrepreneur, and technology futurist. His Ted Talks
have over 20 million views and he is a senior inventor at his lab of 150
scientists and engineers. He's worked on projects such as a brain surgery
shoot down mosquitoes which was part of an impact invention effort to
eradicate malaria with Bill Gates. He's worked on spaceships, [inaudible
00:07:14] SPC, artificial intelligence agent systems, and many more exciting
projects.
As you can tell, this is a very forward thinking person. He is coming to Data
Science Go to tell us where the world of data, technology, artificial
intelligence is going. What we can expect from the future and what we
should look forward to. Personally, I am very excited about getting to his
talk and, as with all the other speakers, it doesn't mean you just sit at the
talk and that's all the value that you'll get. Of course you can network with
everybody from Randy Lao to Eric Weber to Ben Taylor to Pablos Holman.
There's no limits during the breaks, which we have incorporated. We've
incorporated a lunch on Saturday, on Sunday. We've incorporated a
networking event on Friday evening. There's a Data Bash on Saturday
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

evening, which you'll find out what it is when you actually get there on
Saturday. All of these breaks, you can actually network and that's what this
event is all about ... for you to expand your network in the space of data
science.
Those are our speakers. Let's quickly talk about some of the talks.
Depending on which learning track you're in, you will be going to different
talks. Let's start with beginning learning track. We've got definitely a lot of
exciting talks here. For instance, Ben Taylor is speaking about Beyond The
Job: Leaving An AI Legacy. We've got Randy Lao talking about Data Science
For All: Master The Fundamentals. Favio Vazquez is talking about
Becoming A Data Scientist: From Taking a Course to Transforming a
Business With your Knowledge.
Those are just some examples. There's definitely lots of talks. If you're a
beginner, you will go away from here super inspired, super motivated. You
will know exactly how exactly you wanna structure your career or in which
direction you want to go.
Next, we've got the practitioner learning track. This one's interesting
because we actually heard from some of you guys that you would like more
practitioner talks. You want more technical talks at Data Science Go. That
is something that you guys asked for and I want to make sure you are
aware that we heard you, we listened, and we are adding new technical
talks. Here's a couple of examples of the ones that we already have. More
are to come. For instance, we've got a talk by Neelabh Pant, which is
Machine Learning and Deep Learning Methods for Geo-Spatial Analytics.
We've got a talk by Dan Shiebler, Bigger Problems than Big Data: Ten
Serious Machine Learning Issues that Nobody Talks About. We've got a talk
with Matt Dancho, Data Science For Business With Applications In R and
H2O. Those are just some of the examples of the technical talks that we'll

http://www.superdatascience.com/190

have at Data Science Go. Check out the agenda for more. More updates are
coming very shortly.
Finally, we've got the leader learning pathway. Which is, once again, for
business owners, entrepreneurs, executive directors to learn more about
data science and how to leverage it in their businesses and how to build
data science teams and things like that. In this space, we've got some
exciting talks. We've got Josey Parks talking about Man and Machine: The
Intersection Between Data and Business. What else ... We've got Vitaly
Dolgov, who is my own mentor who's flying in from Australia, talking about
Unleashing Potential: Real-Life Case Studies From A Seasoned Business
Turnaround Consultant. Highly recommend, especially for business
owners. Vitaly's a very experienced consultant and has lots of stories to tell,
experiences to share. Then, we've got Francesco Corea talking about the
Convergence of AI and Blockchain.
Once again, those are just some of the examples. We've also got discussion
panels that you can attend and other talks that will be relevant to your
learning track.
On that note, also wanted to mention that we have 21 speakers confirmed.
We have two more slots, or we had two more slots available. Plus, we've
opened up two new slots yesterday just because of how cool we wanna
make this event. How much value we want to add to you guys. We're going
to fill those slots with very exciting talks, so you are going to walk away
completely transformed and with lots of knowledge in how you can apply
these things in your career.
As you can see, it's an event packed with value. We've got a special discount
running right now, which is only going to be available until the 13th of
September. That is next week, Thursday. So, make sure to sign up before
then. It's 50% off. After that, price goes up. If there's any chance at all that
you can come, you have to jump on it. This even will transform your career.
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

Whatever walk of life you are in, in terms of data science. We have a special
discount for students because we know your budget is tight. Check on the
website. We've got some information about that.
Also, if you're coming as a group, there's a special form that you can fill in
to purchase your tickets at a group price. Finally, we have a document that
will help convince your boss to send you to the conference. This was quite a
popular way to get to Data Science Go last year and so we want to help you
out. You don't necessarily have to pay for yourself. Your company might
send you to Data Science Go because it will transform your career so much.
If you're already a practicing data scientist ... If you already are working in
a business ... then, talk to your boss and maybe they will send you to Data
Science Go. We have a document to help you out on the website. You
should just have a look for the document called Convince Your Boss to
Send You to DS Go.
There we go. That's what this is event is all about. Make sure to check it
out. It's at www.datasciencego.com. If you can't make it, personally, for
whatever reason, then share it with somebody who might be able to attend
and will be excited about all these things that they're going to learn ... all
this information that they're going to go through. Really appreciate you help
us spread the word and help impact as many people as we can.
Once again, as mentioned, we have 400 people attending this year, so it'll
be a fantastic opportunity for you to network and meet new people.
On that note, thank you so much for being here today with me. I hope you
enjoyed this episode. As you can see, we are building something super
exciting and I was very privileged to be able to share that with you today. I
also hope that you will take action and sign up for Data Science Go
hopefully before Thursday next week so that you can take advantage of the
discount.
http://www.superdatascience.com/190

Once again, the website is www.datasciencego.com and I look forward to
seeing you in San Diego.

http://www.superdatascience.com/190

