SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 160
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
TOASTMASTERS

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

1

This is FiveMinuteFriday, Episode number 160, Toastmasters.
Welcome back to the Super Data Science Podcast, ladies and gentlemen.
Today I wanted to share an exciting and cool experience with you that I
had. I would love for you to experience as well. I'm in Bali right now, and a
couple of weeks ago, I was at the Dojo, which is a co-working space in
Canggu. By the way, Dojo is my favorite co-working space in the world. I
was very impressed by what it's like and how it feels inside, so if you're ever
in Bali, check it out. The internet there is amazing. Super fast.
Nevertheless, what this is all about is not just about the Dojo. It's about a
random event that happened to me there.
When I was at the Dojo, literally the day I got there was a Tuesday. I saw an
ad, an internal ad that they had or like an announcement that on that
night, they had Toastmasters. I hadn't heard about Toastmasters before,
that it's like an organization or events where people get together and
practice their public speaking. I had never attended one, so I was very
excited to try it out, and I signed up. It was so much fun. It was so cool.
What Toastmasters is all about is people get together, and there's
facilitators of this. This is kind of like a workshop or mini event for 10, 20,
maybe more people. In our case, it was about 20 people. There's a facilitator
or a couple of facilitators that introduce the event, and then there's a few
prepared speakers who've prepared beforehand. They go out. They have like
go on stage or in front of the group. They have some time to speak, so there
was three speakers in our case. They have about five minutes each to speak
about a certain topic that they've prepared. Then there's evaluators, people
in the audience who have been selected as judges, and they're evaluating
their coherency of speech, the words that they use, how fast they're talking,
how they're engaging the audience, how much time they're using, and
things like that. Then they will give them feedback at the end. That's the
first part, those talks.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

2

Then we have the feedback for the talks. I think it was in that order. Then
at the end, or after that half of the Toastmasters event, what you have is
everybody in the audience gets a chance to ... Not everybody, but people
who have either put their hand up or got in on the list beforehand, about
five or seven people ... In our case it was seven people ... got a chance to
actually get on stage and practice their public speaking. The difference here
is that if you're in the audience and you didn't prepare in advance, you
don't know what question you'll get. So the facilitator has a topic. In our
case, the topic was spring, because spring is coming, and they're talking
about different things.
Then as they explain, as they just have this little speech of their own, the
facilitator, at certain points will be like, "Let's talk about positive energy."
Then somebody from the list or somebody who puts their hand up gets on
stage, and you have between one minute and two minutes to talk, to come
up with a random talk to answer a question. The questions vary quite a lot.
They're very interesting. For instance, the question I got was what if you
could have a positive news channel? A lot of the news in the world right
now is negative. What if you could have a news channel that is positive
24/7? What would you broadcast there? Bam. You have to go. You have to
think of something on your feet, and you have to describe it and explain it
in front of 20 people and just talk confidently. Make sure your speech is
coherent, and so on.
Some other questions, some other examples, for instance. One lady got a
question. They put her in a situation where she is adamant, she is
convinced that you have to put the toilet paper on that toilet paper rack in
the way that the toilet paper goes down away from the wall. So it's not kind
of like you're not pulling it from underneath the toilet paper. It's coming ...
The flap is coming over the top. You need to convince the audience that
that's the right way to do it, rather than putting it the other way.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

3

It's a ridiculous argument, but she had to come up with just even absurd
statements just to practice her public speaking and standing on her feet
and delivering a speech. Even if it didn't make total sense, at least it
delivered the point.
Then we've got, for instance, if you had a party to celebrate spring, who
would you invite? Cupcakes versus muffins? Are cupcakes and muffins the
same thing? Why is it better to see the glass half full rather than seeing it
half empty? Those are just some examples of questions. Questions can
vary. It can be absolutely random, but the point is to get out of your
comfort zone. For me, I was sitting there. I was actually quite nervous. I
was waiting for my turn, and then bam, I got called and had to get out
there. As soon as you're out there, it's a bit different. You step over that
threshold. Well, for me it was like that. It might be different for other
people. In any case, it puts you out of your comfort zone and helps you
practice public speaking.
The good thing about Toastmasters is it's not just a Bali thing or Canggu
thing. They actually ... It's a club that's over 90 years old. They were
established in 1924. They have 352,000 members worldwide. By the way,
you don't have to be a member of Toastmasters. I didn't become a member
of Toastmasters. I just attended that event, and nobody asked me to sign
up for a membership. I'm not sure how it would be in other parts of the
world, but in this case, I didn't have to become a member. They have
16,400 clubs in 141 countries. How crazy is that? The likelihood of there
being a club in your country is very high, and the chance that it's in your
city is also pretty high, especially if you're living in a big city or a city where
... Yeah. Basically, a big city or even a midsize city. There's probably a
Toastmasters. So you can jump on their website, toastmasters.org, and
they actually have a club locator app so you can just search for location. It
will tell you what clubs are there.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

4

I highly recommend, really highly recommend checking it out. We've talked
a lot about meet ups and attending data science meet ups. Those are great
to practice your data sense skills and meet people and network and so on
and maybe even present. But you won't always have the chance to present
at a data science meet up, because they don't have that many people
presenting, usually. It's usually one or two, maybe three people at a time,
and then more people in the audience, whereas Toastmasters is geared
towards honing in your presentation skills.
We've talked about this many, many times, that presentation is the fifth
step. Presentation of your results is the fifth step in the data science project
life cycle. It is extremely important. In fact, those data scientists that are
communicators, that are the bridge between the data and the decision
makers, the business decision makers, those people who need to
understand those insights, those are the most valued data scientists in
business, in industry, and wherever you go. That's the most, probably the
most valuable skill. So crunching numbers, creating visuals, running
algorithms, that's very important, but being able to communicate your
insights and present them and engage your audience, super important.
The thing is, whether you are confident in your presentation skills or not,
Toastmasters is a great way to refine them, to learn something new, to
practice, to get out of your comfort zone, to get out there and just to have
fun. It was such a fun night. I had a great time being there, meeting people.
Everybody is so friendly. That's the other thing you should ... Even though
there are people who are judges for the first three presenters who prepared
their speeches, in reality, nobody is judging anybody. They're just giving
feedback. They're just helping people, each other, improve, and everybody is
having a great time. So you won't feel judged. You won't feel that you are
under the microscope or anything. Just go there and have a great time.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

5

There you go. That's Toastmasters. Highly encouraged to check it out.
There's probably one in your city. If not, then when you go traveling, maybe
you can line that up for yourself to visit one of those, or when you're visiting
your family and friends somewhere else. On that note, I hope you enjoyed
today's podcast. I really hope you'll check out Toastmasters, and I'll see you
next time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/160

6

