SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 178
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
VISUALIZATION IN
DATA SCIENCE

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/178

1

Hey, guys. Welcome to the Super Data Science Podcast. This is Five-Minute
Friday, and today, we're talking about the importance of visualization in
data science.
Today, I'm at the Queensland University of Technology Library. Queensland
University of Technology or QUT for short is a wonderful university in the
city of Brisbane in the state of Queensland in Australia. Today, we're
talking about visualization, so you probably have already noticed a couple
of emails floating around and a few invitations for you to come and join us
in the revamped Tableau 2018 course.
In fact, we're launching two courses at the same time this week. We're
launching the Tableau Basic 2018 Course and the Tableau 2018 Advanced
Course at the same time, so we'd love to see you in there, and today's FiveMinute Friday is inspired by those courses to talk about the topic of
visualization.
Last week, during the Five-Minute Friday, we spoke about the importance
of storytelling in data science. Well, visualization is something that can help
with storytelling. In fact, visualization has two components. This is my
personal view. Visualization in data science can be used for two distinct
purposes, and we're going to actually start off a different purpose, not the
one that's related to storytelling, but like ... It is in a way, but it isn't.
The first purpose of visualization that I define for myself is visualization for
data mining. When you have a lot of data, when you have tons, and tons of
rows and columns, and data points in your dataset, it can be very difficult
through them, very difficult to understand what's going on and make sense
of it even for yourself, even to understand where to start building your
model to explore the data to perform that crucial step of data mining when
you're looking for clues, when you're looking for answer.
We're not even ready yet to build a model because you want to understand,
what are the important features? What are the not important features?
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/178

2

What anomalies exist in your dataset? What does your dataset look like,
and what does it feel like? If we were machines, we would just like look
through all that data, all those tables and spreadsheets, whatever other
data we have, and we would understand right away what's going on. We'd
be able to, from there, start our analytics, but we are not.
For us as humans, it's really hard to look at a spreadsheet of a billion roles
and try to get something from it. What we can do on the other hand is we
can look at visuals, and that's where visualization comes in in this first
purpose where it allows you and helps you to see your data, to get a feel for
your data, to transform your data from just numbers into something that
can actually ... that you can interact with, that you can understand as the
explorer, as the investigator.
That's why I really like visualization a lot. At the very start of my projects,
before I even create any models, even before ... like even sometimes before I
do the proper data progression when I can just like get the data, throw it
into the visualization tool, solve this like a drag-and-drop fast tool. I already
might be able to get some insight from it. It might even help me during the
data progression phase to understand, "Okay. What are the anomalies? All
right. What do the distributions look like and other things like that?" That's
data visualization for data mining.
On the other hand, we have visualization for presentation, and that ties in
very well with what we talked about last time on the previous week's FiveMinute Friday where we're talking about the importance of storytelling. As
you remember, when we just throw hard facts at people, only two areas of
the brain are actually active. When we tell a story, we can engage way more
areas of the brain, and that will help with compression of it and retention of
information.
That's why it's so important to be able to come up with not just the
visualization that conveys the insights, but a visualization that actually tells
a story, that engages your audience, that gets them intrigued, that gets
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/178

3

them fascinated, that makes them say, "Wow," that makes them ask more
questions and get the answers from that same visualization or the next
visualization in your slide deck in your presentation.
That is, my friends, the importance and value of visualization. In fact, we
currently are in a state of data science where there's lots of companies
demanding data scientists and there's lots of data scientists that are ready
to provide these services. This field has been around for a couple of years
now, and it's slowly starting to get to the phase where the demand is high
and the supply is high, but what is actually the missing link are those data
scientists that can not only get the insights, but actually convey the
insights to the audience in a way that's going to be engaging, that's going to
be fun, that's going to help them understand.
Those are the top, top data scientists, and one of the most important skills
that they have is visualizing the data or the insights that they have and
presenting them to the audience, so that is the importance of visualization.
It can help you in two phases. It can help you at the very start of your data
science project, and it can help you at the very end of your data science
project in order to make you one of the most successful data scientists.
If you're excited about that and you've seen some of our Tableau invitations
for Tableau 2018 courses that we're releasing this week, then jump on
board. Tableau is an amazing tool, one of my favorite. In fact, my favorite
tool for visualizing data. It's very drag-and-drop tool. Very easy to use, and
we'd love to help you master that tool and become a master visualizer. On
that note, thank you for being here today, and I can't wait to see you back
here next time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/178

4

