SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 210
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
COMPETE WITH
YOURSELF

http://www.superdatascience.com/210

This is Five Minute Friday, Compete With Yourself. Welcome back to the
Super Data Science podcast, ladies and gentlemen. Super excited to have
you on the show today.
And today's idea came out of a conversation I was having with Paulo on our
way from Yosemite to San Francisco. So for those of you who don't know,
Paulo is a colleague and a dear friend of mine and what we were talking
about was ambition and being competitive, and how those qualities have
served us in our lives.
And what we found is that both of us, both Paulo and I, are highly
ambitious and highly competitive as well. And I know not everybody will
agree that those are good qualities. Like they've definitely served us in our
lives and they've helped us accomplish certain things. But indeed, I will
agree that there is a school of thought that being highly competitive is not
the best thing. It's not the best quality to have because perhaps maybe you
won't get along with people as well, or it will be harder to be a team player,
or it will maybe make your personality more rigid and people will feel kind
of a bit, a bit tense around you.
Maybe being competitive is not the best idea in everybody's mind. And that
is totally fair. Both schools of thought are valid, whether you think that
being competitive is a great quality to have or being competitive is
something you don't really want too strong in your personality. That is
totally, I think both ways of thinking are totally fine.
But what we did agree with on Paulo was that there is a type of competition
that in our minds would benefit absolutely anybody and people who engage
in that type of competition are people who grow the fastest, are people who
learn the quickest and accomplish truly great things. And that is
competition with yourself.
And that, what that is seeing who you are for who you are and whether or
not you go out there and you set yourself benchmarks by looking at other
people and trying to be better than them and trying to, you know, like
http://www.superdatascience.com/210

maybe even satisfy your ego to compete and prove to the world that you can
do something better and stronger and faster.
Competition in yourself is different. Competition in yourself is internalizing,
is sitting down and seeing what am I capable of right now? What's, who
have I grown to become? And we've all grown in our lives to become great
people and some to be able to have capacity to create great things so far.
But can we take that to the next level? If for instance, in your work, if you
can code in Python, and you consider yourself an intermediate level. Can
you take that and become advanced level? Can you take that and become
an expert level in Python?
Or for instance in your interpersonal skills. Again at work, you find that
you have grown over the past year to be able to present to an audience of
20 people comfortably, but can you take that to the next level and present
to an audience of five executives or 200 people or maybe grow to the level
where your presentation skills are such that you can actually teach
someone else how to present.
Or maybe it might be in your personal life in terms of your fitness. You're
able to do 20 pushups in a row, maybe can you grow to do 25. And so that
constant competition with yourself is what pushes us to grow and to
become better all the time. That seeing yourself as not necessarily as an
enemy or an opponent, but as, like as a role model that you want to
outgrow, right? You definitely don't want to grow, like, go backwards. You
don't want to go like, take steps backwards in terms of your growth, but
you also don't want to stagnate. You don't want to be just always at some
point, you don't want to become happy with who you are, what level you
are, but you want to constantly grow.
As Tony Robbins says, if you're not growing, you're dying. You want to be
growing. If a business is not growing, it's dying. If a relationship is not
growing, it's dying. Same goes for humans and our personalities and our
skills. If we're not developing them constantly, then they're fading away.
http://www.superdatascience.com/210

And so what really helped both Paulo and I, what we found is that thinking
about that, not through just the necessity of growth, but the necessity of
becoming better, the necessity of competing with yourself and proving to
yourself that, yes, I accomplished this. I got to this level, next time I can
take it to the next level. I will focus on taking my skills or whatever it is to
the next level and becoming better than I was before.
So that's in essence, competition with yourself. And what I would like to
challenge you to do this weekend is think of a space where, maybe two,
think of a space where you have been competing with yourself for, usually
these competitions last for a lifetime. Like for a very long time, you've been
constantly pushing yourself through competition with yourself, and
demanding from yourself more and more and more all the time.
And think of an area in your life where you haven't. Where you've kind of
like leveled out, you've plateaued. And if it's something that you don't really
mind not having in your life, that's fine. If it's like a skill that you know,
maybe you don't, maybe it's about, you were good at cycling and you no
longer want to do cycling, that's fine.
But maybe it's something that you do value. It's a skill or a quality, a
personality trait that you do value, but you've stagnated, you stopped
competing with yourself. Think of a personality trait like that, and maybe
it's time to challenge yourself to a competition. Challenge yourself to
become better than the current version of yourself in that space.
So there you go. That's competition with yourself and how it can propel you
forward in any area of your life. The thing is you won't always have a
worthy opponent outside. You won't always have a worthy, you can try find
one, but not always they'll be ready, available, somebody you can cycle
with, to compete with them or somebody you can look at how they're coding
in Python and become better than that. You won't always find a worthy
opponent outside, but you will always find a worthy opponent inside. And
that is you. How can you better compete with yourself?
http://www.superdatascience.com/210

Thank you very much for being here today, ladies and gentlemen. I look
forward to seeing you back here next time. And until then, happy analyzing.

http://www.superdatascience.com/210

