SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 148
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
THE TROLLEY
PROBLEM

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

1

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 144, two things to remember
and two things to forget.
Welcome back to the Super Data Science podcast, and today I've got a
concept, a phrase that really resonated with me, and I would like to share it
with you. So, I was listening to a different podcast, I was listening to Lewis
Howe School of Greatness podcast, episode number 608. If you haven't
heard Lewis Howes podcast School of Greatness, I highly recommend check
it out, you can start off at this episode, 608.
It's with Jay Shetty. Jay is a guy from London who went and lived as a
monk in India for three years, and then came back, and now he's teaching
people the things that he learned. Mostly through videos, so you may have
seen his videos on Facebook or YouTube, they go viral, they get like 50
million views. So you may have actually already seen a couple of his lessons
that he's shared.
And in this podcast, there's lots and lots of valuable things that they
discussed, and lots of valuable knowledge that he shared, especially
wisdom from his time as being a monk. But one thing that really resonated
with me, and I remember I was walking onto the tarmac, off the plane onto
the tarmac, and for me, when something resonates with me, when it really
sticks in my mind, I can remember the location where I was, it's just how
my brain works. And I can clearly remember that I was getting off the
plane, and walking onto the tarmac to get to the bus that takes you away
from the plane.
And I heard him say this, so here we go. What Jay said, and what he
learned, one of the things he learned as a monk is two things to remember
and two things to forget. So let's go through this, the two things to
remembers are always remember the bad you've done to others, and the
good others have done to you. So, again, always remember the bad you've
done to others, and the good others have done to you.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

2

And he explains it this way, that by remembering the bad you've done to
others, you will always feel grounded and humble, and you'll never let your
ego get over you. So as soon as you start thinking how amazing I am, or
how great I am, and how I'm achieving success, or I'm doing so many great
things, all it takes is to remember what bad things, what have you done
that's bad, and you've done it to others in your past. When you were
younger, or years ago, or months ago. And we all have moments we're not
proud of, we all have moment which we might even be embarrassed by.
And so keeping those in your memory actually helps you to control your
ego, to always realize that we're all not perfect, that we all make mistakes.
That we all need to work on ourselves constantly to become better and
better, there's no stopping with that. And it really keeps our ego under
control, or helps keep your ego under control.
And the other one is to remember the good things that others have done to
you, and by remembering the good things others have done to you, you're
always going to feel grateful. So those are the two things to remember.
Now, the two things to forget, forget the good things you've done to others,
and forget the bad things others have done to you. So again, forget the good
things you've done to others, and forget the bad things others have done to
you. And the reason for that is if you don't forget, like if you keep thinking
about the good things that you've done to others, then you will get fixated
on that for too long, and again, your ego is going to grow from that. So if
you just keep remembering how you helped that old lady cross the street, or
how you donated $200 to charity, or whatever it was, if you just keep
remembering that all the time and fixating on that, that's just going to
perpetuate that feeling, and it's going to enable your ego to keep growing all
the time, and you don't want that.
So, once you've done a good thing, there's no need to constantly be proud of
it and remember it all the time. It's okay to forget that. And forget the bad
things others have done to you. Why should you forget that? Well, he also
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

3

explains it in a way that you don't have to necessarily become their best
friend after that, but the reason for that is that if you keep thinking about
the bad things others have done to you, and you fixate on that, you're just
going to drain your energy forever. You're not going to be able to look
forward, not going to be able to live life in the present, and move on with
your life, you're just going to constantly lose energy because of something
that happened in your past. And sometimes it's necessary to forget those
things.
So there we go, that's two things to remember and two things to forget.
Always remember the bad things, the bad you've done to others and the
good others have done to you. And forget the good things you've done to
others and the bad things others have done to you.
Something to ponder on this weekend, once again, it's from the Lewis
Howes podcast, episode 608, make sure to check it out if you're interested
to learn more of Jay Shetty's teachings and wisdom. And I hope you have a
fantastic weekend ahead and you've got some plans, or even if you don't, I
hope you have a quiet one, and have some rest.
I look forward to seeing you back here next time, until then, happy
analyzing. This is Five Minute Friday episode number 148, The Trolley
Problem. Welcome back to the Super Data Science podcast. Today we're
going to have an interesting, and at the same time, controversial
discussion. You probably have heard that you need to surround yourself
with amazing people, with interesting people that you want to be like, learn
from, and therefore you will grow. I try to do that in my own life, and one of
these amazing people in my life introduced me to something that is very
exciting, and it's called the Radiolab podcast. It's a podcast which you can
find on iTunes, and I'm assuming that since you're listening to this podcast,
you are interested in podcasts, so definitely check it out.
Radiolab is a high-production show that does research into current topics,
or any kind of different topics that are interesting, that are exciting, and
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

4

they produce them with very high quality, great audio, great audio effects,
lots of guests, lots of different comments from different people that are cut
into the episodes. The research is very deep, so so far I've listened to two
episodes. One was about gun control and that one was an hour long, and
they went through the whole history of the second amendment, how it only
actually started being interpreted as it is now in the 2000s. This whole
interpretation actually started in 2008, as I believe, after a case in
Washington. Before that, there was something happening in 2001, and then
they went to the history from the 1960s, so it was a really cool episode.
Today, I listened to an episode called ... What was it called? Let me quickly
have a look, Driverless Dilemma. The episode was called Driverless
Dilemma. What they were talking about is what I wanted to share today. I'm
only going to share a snippet of what I learned. If you want to learn the full
story and all the research, like they talk to an MRI scientist and research
the human brain on this subject, then check out Radiolab. But let's get
started. We're going to talk about the driverless dilemma. Actually, we're
going to talk about the trolley problem, which is part of the driverless
dilemma.
The trolley problem goes like this. You are standing on a trolley, which is
going down some train tracks. Along those train tracks, ahead of you, there
are five workers working on the track. They're facing away from the trolley,
they cannot see you coming, and they cannot hear the trolley, and you
cannot yell out to them. If you do nothing while on this trolley, then what'll
happen is that all five workers will die. On the other hand, it so happens
that on the trolley near you, there's a lever, and if you pull that lever, then
the trolley will divert onto some side tracks where there's only one worker,
and that worker will die.
In this case, your choice is A) do nothing and five people will die, or B) pull
the lever and one person will die. Question is, what will you choose? Think
about it for a second and just have your answer with you. I really wonder
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

5

what you selected, because when the guys from Radiolab asked this
question from, I think it was random people on the street, 90% of the
people said they would pull the lever. They would kill one person instead of
killing five. They basically would pull the lever, kill one, instead of do
nothing and kill five.
Then, we go to part two. Now imagine you're standing above the train
tracks. You're standing on a bridge that goes over the train tracks, and you
can see the trolley approaching, and it's going to, as soon as it passes the
bridge, on the other side, it will kill ... passes under the bridge, it will kill
those five same workers. The only thing you can do now is, again, the two
things you can do, you can do nothing, version A like last time, and it will
kill the five workers, or version B, there's a ... You notice that there's a large
man standing near you, a large person standing near you on the bridge,
and what you can do is you can push the large person off the bridge onto
the tracks. He will die, but he will stop the trolley and therefore save the
other five people. The question is will you do A, nothing, and let five people
die, or will you do B, push the large person off the bridge onto the tracks,
and thereby stop the trolley and kill that one person, but save the five?
What's your instinctive response here? Let me guess, probably you're going
to say no, you're not going to push the person. Why can I guess that? It's
because when the guys from Radiolab did the same survey, but with this
question, most people, 90% of the people said that they wouldn't kill the
person, because in this case it really feels like murder. It feels like you're
murdering a person, even though you're trying to save five. Very
controversial topic, very controversial question. Good thing that it's just
theoretical. It's just theoretical, we're never actually faced with a choice like
that in life. This is something that we'll just contemplate about in the trolley
problem.
But the thing is, why it's now become current, is because of the
proliferation of self-driving cars. Self-driving cars are starting to pop up.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

6

There are already self-driving Ubers which you can take. By 2021, certain
companies in Germany are going to release self-driving cars for sale to the
public, so you can actually ... You'll be able to own self-driving cars, might
even happen sooner with other automobile manufacturers or companies in
the US. This is the future we're going into. Self-driving cars are going to
have to have pre-programmed algorithms that will allow them to make
choices like that.
For instance, if there's people on the road, pedestrians on the road, if
there's five pedestrians on the road. Let's think about this theoretically.
Again, they gave this example in the Radiolab episode. There's five
pedestrians on the road, and there's a self-driving car coming towards
them. Should the car kill the five pedestrians, or should it run into a
concrete wall, and thereby kill the passenger of the car? Those are the only
two options it has. The circumstances are such that there's nothing else it
can do, and it can only decide between the two. How does it decide? What is
the correct decision? Most people answer to that question that it should
sacrifice the person inside the car. It should sacrifice the passenger in order
to save five people. Sacrifice one life in order to save five. But then, when
those same people are asked will you buy a car like that? Will you buy a car
that is pre-programmed to intentionally kill you in order to save more lives
than just one, most people said no. Most people said they won't buy a car
like that.
Now, we have a question of morality, and also how are these companies
going to be perceived by the public? Are people going to actually buy the
cars? Are they going to be perceived as moral or amoral, and so on? All of
this ties in very intricately into the question of ethics in data science,
machine learning, and artificial intelligence, because these questions, they
need to somehow be addressed in advance. They cannot be left up to some
programmers who are creating these algorithms to decide this on the spot.
These things have to be thought through not just at a company level, they
should be thought at a national level, or even a global level.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

7

For instance, Germany's one of the first countries that has passed a law, as
I understood from the podcast, that they've passed a law that addresses the
issue of discrimination, that autonomous vehicles should not discriminate
between people on any basis. They should not discriminate based on
gender, on race, on age, on social status, on income, or on anything like
that. Yes, that is indeed a possibility that, for instance, self-driving cars
could discriminate potentially even on things like income level of a person,
because eventually they'll be able to communicate with each other. They'll
have so much data about us that they will know who's sitting in Car A,
who's sitting in Car B, and potentially they could make these decisions
based on who has a more affluence status in the socium, or who is younger,
or who has a ... Maybe somebody has a terminal illness, and those might
not be ethical things. While there's no right or wrong answer right now, that
we can think of, these are things to keep in mind and to consider, and this
is where the world is going. Self-driving cars, they're coming into our lives
very rapidly, and these are questions that we will need to be addressing.
There's something to ponder on, something philosophical to think about.
Maybe a topic starter for you for this weekend, if you're going to be chatting
to some friends, or going to an event, social gathering, or something like
that. See how people react to the trolley problem, or the driverless dilemma.
Of course, if you're interested to learn more, highly recommend the
Radiolab podcast. This was Driverless Dilemma, which was released on 27
September, 2017. The episode is 42 minutes long. Highly recommend
checking it out if you're interested to learn more, and understand not only
philosophically what's happening, and what the dilemma is, but actually
from a neurological perspective, what happens in the brain, because they
talk to a scientist who's put people into an MRI machine and studied their
brain when they were answering these questions. Plus, there's some more
interesting questions that are discussed in the show.
All right. Hope you enjoyed this short excurse into the world of
philosophical debates and autonomous vehicles that are going to be more
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

8

and more current in years to come, and I look forward to seeing you back
here next time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/148

9

