SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 168
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
STRENGTHS &
WEAKNESSES

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/168

1

Hey guys. Kirill here and this is Five Minute Friday. Hope you had a great
week and today we're going to talk about strengths and weaknesses.
So, once when I just joined Deloitte, we had a cash app where basically we
had this meet up where all of the new graduates who joined Deloitte would
go to Melbourne and would spend two days there or three days where we
would meet up with some of the executives and they would tell us about the
vision of the company and what it's all about and what we're basically
getting into, and there we got to hear form the CEO of Deloitte who at the
time was Giam Swiegers. This is Deloitte Australia and Giam Swiegers,
originally from South Africa, he was the CEO, and it was a very interesting
tour.
One thing really resonated with me and I'd like to share it with you today.
The thing that he said was, it was towards the end of his talk, and he was
saying "Alright, so how do you become successful? So how did you become
one of the top players, top people in your profession, top consultants, data
scientists, whatever it is, how do you become ultra successful?" And what
he said was very interesting because of how controversial it is.
You know how sometimes we say, alright so strengths, it's important to
harness your strengths, understand what they are and develop them
further, and also at the same time, weaknesses, you got to work on them.
They're not good. You've got to improve your weaknesses so you don't have
weaknesses basically.
Well, what he said is actually a saying that I have repeated to many people
since then and I also have repeated to myself many times as well and he
said, "Focus on your strengths and ignore your weaknesses." How
interesting is that, that you basically shouldn't waste time tying to improve
your weaknesses and becoming good all around, becoming a professional or
an expert in all the different things or all different skills, even. You should
understand what your strengths are and really bet on your strengths, really
improve them, really make them grow and get the most out of those
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/168

2

strengths and that way, you will get ahead in those areas where you do
have strengths and in the areas where you have weaknesses, there you can
find people that compliment you as part of the team you're in, or if you're
building your own business, as people that are going to be surrounding
you, or maybe you could get advisors, you could get consultants, you could
maybe read some advice on a specific topic on how to fix that situation.
His advice was don't waste time on your weaknesses, when you have your
strengths tat could propel you forward much, much faster, because they're
already your strengths and give that they're your strengths, they're
probably something you are passionate about, probably something that you
enjoy doing, so that's my tip for you today.
It's really helped me a lot in life and really helped me get to where I am and
achieve great things and maybe achieve quite a lot of things that I have
achieved in life, and so I always look back at this tip or very often, I look
back at this tip so have a think about that, maybe this weekend.
What are your strengths and what are some your weaknesses that you
recognize and, of course, there might be some weaknesses that you
definitely need to think about. Maybe it's communication skills are
something like that, that are a hurdle, but what are some of those
weaknesses that you can totally ignore and still become successful? That's
a very interesting question to think about.
Alright. I hope you have a great weekend and focus on your strengths.
Ignore your weaknesses as my great mentor Giam Swiegers told me one
time. And on that note, I look forward to seeing you back here next time.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/168

3

