SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 172
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
GO BEYOND THE
DATA

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/172

1

Hey guys, welcome back to Super Data Science podcast, this is
FiveMinuteFriday, and today, we're talking about how to go beyond data.
All right. So, first of all, before we get started, a huge shout out to all of our
students from Egypt! I mean, we're done there right now, it's an amazing
place, very exciting country. I've been the pyramids a couple of times. I'm
going for a few scuba dives in the coming week, and very, very excited about
Egypt.
One thing I do wanna say, it is so hot in your country! This is crazy, guys.
How do you survive here? Yesterday, it was 42 degrees, and I was burning.
Right now, it's so hot, I found this one shady place that I could record this
podcast in. So, huge shout out if you are from Egypt. Thank you so much
for being a student. I know we have at least a couple thousand students
from Egypt. You guys have an amazing country, and it just generally rocks.
The other thing is, if you're watching the video, you can see these funky
sunglasses that I'm wearing. I wanna do a huge shout out to Tree Tribe. Not
affiliated with them in any way, just some cool guys and girls put this
company together, and they're running this. It's about creating products
that are sustainable and helpful for environment. These sunglasses are
actually made out of bamboo, so that is environmentally friendly. Second
thing is, they float if you drop them in the water, so they don't get lost.
Third thing is, every time you buy a product from them, they plant 10 trees.
Amazing. And fourth thing is, they look pretty cool.
All right. So, that is our intro part, and now, let's talk about the topic. I was
flying here from ... It's quite a long flight. Several short flights, but you
know, two hours each but overall, a long day. On my flight from I think
Khartoum to Cairo, I was sitting next to a lady who works, guess where? At
World Bank. How cool is that? Because, if you've done ... Of course, you
know that we use data from World Bank quite a lot. We use data sets such
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/172

2

as different demographics of different countries, we use the overall
geopolitical situation, or socio-economical statuses of different countries
and regions. For instance, we might get data on access to internet, and
then cross-tabulate that with data on population and see how those two are
interlinked. So, we've done quite a few of those things in our courses.
So, this lady works at World Blank, and we got to talking about data sets
and how she's involved with them, and what data sets she uses in her own.
She mentioned quite an interesting phrase that I actually really liked. It
was, "Sometimes you need to go beyond the data." At first, I thought, why
would you go beyond the data if the data can tell you everything, right?
Everything in our life is data. Right now, this gust of wind is blowing, and
some leaves are moving. This is actually data, but we're not capturing it,
per se. If we captured it, and stored it, and analyzed it, we could make use
of it. But the fact that we don't capture it doesn't mean that it's not there.
Basically the point is that everything in the world is actually data, so why
would you ever go beyond data. Why would you bother with other things
apart from data?
The thing is, if we had all the data in the world, like every single dada piece,
then yeah, then we could analyze and extract any insight. However, we
don't. A lot of the time there are things that are still hidden that we cannot
extract, but just look at data. A good example is, even working at World
Bank, she was ... How does that look? That's good, yeah?
She was, sometimes she needs to analyze the data, especially forecasts for
different countries because she works in the part where they invest into
new private projects and helps in growing private companies in Madagascar
and Comarose and other countries in the Third World, to grow. And so,
sometimes she needs to analyze the forecast for different countries'
developments, GDPs, and so on. She compares World Bank data to IMF
date. IMF is the International Monetary Fund, and they do similar things
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/172

3

sometimes. They sometimes, also, do forecasts or gather data. Sometimes
the date matches up, sometimes it doesn't match up.
So, what do you do when it doesn't match up? I'm sure you've had those
situations in your career, or you will have this situations in your career
where you have data from two sources, and they're both valid and relevant,
but they don't match up for some reason. What do you do?
Well, that's when you need to go beyond the data. You need to go and either
talk to the people that came up with these data sets, or that collected them,
or that gave them to you, or that made those forecasts, made those
predictions. Or, you need to see, what are the different motivators behind
them? What are the different drivers? Maybe the analytics that went into
those data sets or methodologies are slightly different, and that makes a
difference. Maybe the intentions, motivators, are different, and therefore
these people wanted different results.
So, you need to understand, lots of different factors could have influenced
the data. That's why sometimes, and actually, often, you need to go beyond
the data. Even what that's not happening, that might be just because you're
analyzing one single data set, and you're not comparing it to anything or
you don't have anything to compare it to. If you did, you would see that
there was a discrepancy and that you do need to investigate it further. So,
it's always a good idea to go beyond the data, and understand how did it
originate? How did the people collect it? What thought went into it? What
was the purpose of collecting this data? Is that the exact purpose that
you're collecting for, or do you need to make adjustments and account for
the differences there?
So, think about that, that going beyond data is a skill ... It's like a next-level
skill for a data scientist. Building a machine, learning algorithms,
crunching numbers, creating insights, that's all great. That's the essential
foundation that you need in this profession, but going beyond data is an
extra consideration. Like, you know, what's the difference between a threeShow Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/172

4

start hotel and a five-star hotel? Or, a four ... What takes a four-star hotel
to a five-star hotel? Where they do that extra care, they give you extra care,
and they look after you a bit more, and they make sure you're happy about
everything. They're very thoughtful, right?
And so, going beyond data sometimes is absolutely necessary when you're
just put into those circumstances, but sometimes it's a good habit because
you want to be thoughtful. You want to take extra care, and do your job
extra well to make sure that everything matches up, and everything adds
up, and that you are driving the right insights.
So, there we go. That's going beyond data. I guess, this weekend, what I
would encourage you to do is look back on your past week, look back on
your past month. See where you didn't go beyond the data, where you just
used the data plainly, but you could have had. You could have gone beyond
the data, and seen what else there is, what other motivators and drivers
behind how this data was created.
On that note, hope you have a fantastic weekend, and these are from
treetribe.com. Look forward to seeing you back here next time. Until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/172

5

