SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 188
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
THE DATA SCIENCE
GAP

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

1

This is Five Minute Friday Episode 188, The Data Science Gap. Welcome
back to the Super Data Science podcast, ladies and gentlemen. Today we
got a very exciting topic to cover off a very intriguing topic which is called
data science gap. This is a term that we came up with at Super Data
Science for a phenomenon which we're observing in the data science
marketplace. What is this all about?
If you look at the data science job market then you will find that on one
hand you've got a booming requirement for jobs. The number of jobs is
constantly increasing. There's a huge demand for data science skills for
machine learning experts, for artificial intelligence experts. for data
scientists across the board to join companies and drive their operations and
their businesses in general. We have data, [power 00:01:02] of data and
that is a great representation of the fact that the number of ... the amount
of data is growing exponentially in the world and businesses due to
competitive pressure are more and more looking into leveraging their own
data, leveraging this asset that they have that they haven't been looking at,
that they haven't been seeing, that they haven't been leveraging, haven't
being utilizing.
Now they're looking at leveraging it to further to get that extra efficiency, to
get that extra margin, to get that extra competitive edge to service their
customers better and so on. That's on the side of demand. It definitely is
there. On the other hand, in terms of supply what's going on? A couple of
years ago it wasn't there. Data science was so new, businesses wanted data
scientists but the data scientists weren't there. But now what we're seeing
is that there is lots of data scientists flooding the market. There's people
who've taken education in the space who would now even have experience.
They're posting their profiles, they're posting their ... they're applying for
these jobs so the supply is also there.
But at the same time, the data science jobs are still very hard to fill. Even
though there's supply and demand, the supply it's a very booming topi. You
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

2

would expect that these jobs would get filled very quickly. In reality, data
science jobs are actually open for 45 days on average in the US which is five
days longer than the national average of 40 days. Normally jobs are only
open for about 40 days on average, in this space data science is 45 days.
Why is this happening? Why is it so hard to fill these data science jobs even
though there is supply and there is demand or demand and supply? This
phenomenon is what we are calling the data science gap. This gap actually
comes from a number of reasons, from the fact that on one hand the supply
that we have for data science, people who are still applying for these jobs,
who are submitting their resumes aren't necessarily skilled enough
experienced enough in the space of data science to fill those jobs.
On the other hand, what we are seeing is actually most of the reason for
this gap is actually coming from the demand side, from the fact that
recruiters and HR managers are not yet used to this whole new topic of
data science. They're not very familiar with this playing field and when they
come up with these job descriptions sometimes they're using templates
from other areas, other kind of similar areas which don't really work for
data science. For instance, a job description which requires eight years of
experience in data science is quite absurd given that the field has barely
been around for that long, not even that long. How can somebody have 8 or
10 or 15 years of experience in data science if the field hasn't been around
long enough for that to happen.
Examples like that or when you see a job description where somebody is
required to have Python, [inaudible 00:04:18], in Java and Math lab and all
these different skills and all these different industry knowledge and
experience, all these different industry and all the experience, again, some
of these job descriptions are just very forced and looking for extremely rare
qualities in candidates or essentially that's where the term unicorns. Data
science unicorns comes from that some of the job description are looking
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

3

for people which cannot physically exist because the requirements are so
stringent.
Where they all comes from is the fact that the field is so young, the field is
so ... even while yet it's so powerful, it is so young that recruiters and HR
managers just don't know how to describe what exactly they need. They
cannot ... it's really hard for them to come up with the description or like
overview of what exactly are they looking for. Many just don't even
understand the field well enough to understand who they are looking. That
is the data science gap.
One of our missions at Super Data Science is to bridge that gap, to help on
one hand organizations create better job descriptions and understand
better who exactly do they need. They don't really need a unicorn, they
maybe need three of these types of data scientists. Or maybe they need one
data scientist with this experience, this knowledge and maybe four of these
data scientists and how to build that team and things. On the other hand,
we want to help you, our listeners, our students, people who we want to
ultimately take care of, we want to help you bridge that gap on your side to
better your show companies that you are the right fit for their role.
Today we're going to go through six tips that we've come up with that will
help you bridge the gap from your side. Here we go, let's dive straight into
them. Tip number one is understand the field. Try to really get the domain
knowledge of the company that you are applying for, for that business.
Maybe you're not applying for a specific country, you might be interested in
a certain industry, or might be healthcare, or might be a logistics or
transportation, or it might be mining, it might be finance and banking.
Understand the specifics of that industry and this is what we call domain
knowledge. Understand potential problems, challenges, types of customers,
partners, resources, logistics, assets, liabilities, all these different things
that go into business operations and how businesses work in that space.
Understand the field really, really well. Understand what are the
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

4

competitors of the company that you're interested in, how are they doing
this, what's the differences.
Once you have this knowledge, ideally you even maybe do some projects,
practical assignments or get some practical hands-on experience through
case studies, for instance. For example at Super Data Science in the
platform, we actually have case studies which we run, or in some of our
courses we have case studies where we talk about industry-specific case to
help you not only understand the algorithms and techniques that you can
use, but also get some of that hands-on domain knowledge and get the
practical skills in that space. That's number one, and because once you
have that, all of a sudden you are much more lucrative or much more
interesting candidate for the recruiters and HR managers because you
already know their field, you've already demonstrated the interest and
capacity to understand their field.
Number two, take a course. Of course if you're listening to this podcast,
chances are that you've already taken one or even several of our courses,
keep that education going, keep learning, keep looking and because the
data science field moves very quickly, you want to be on top of things. At
Super Data Science, for instance, we're releasing courses as these
technologies come up. For example, in February this year a new artificial
intelligence technology came out, augmented random search or ARS. By I
think it was March or April, we already released the course on ARS because
we want you to be on the cutting edge of technology, we want you to be
knowledgeable about all of these things that are happening because who's
going to ultimately get hired? The people who stand out and the people who
stand out are for instance those people who are always learning the very
musings, the most advanced techniques that are going to help businesses.
Ultimately, you don't have to be implementing them right away in a
business but even knowing them shows that you are a person who is
interested and was vested into this field.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

5

In that ocean of supply of data scientists that have flooded the market in
recently, which isn't bad, which is a great thing, but you want to stand out.
One of the ways to stand out is to know the most recent skill or recent tools
or deepen your knowledge in the tools that you're really passionate about,
that you really want to produce.
Number three, get a mentor. I cannot stress enough how much of a
difference in my life mentors have made. I've had mentors in the space of
data science, in space of business. For my personal life, I've had mentors
for understanding how to bring efficiency and optimize the way I structure
my day and things. It's extremely important to have a mentor who will
guide you in some of these career choices or challenge you on some of these
things that you might be delving into a certain field or some industry or
certain topic, and they might challenge you why are you doing that? Is this
most efficient way to go about your career? What else can you do?
They might open up doors for you, they might open up your eyes on certain
things. Extremely, extremely important, find somebody. We had a podcast,
we had a Five Minute Friday episode on the importance of mentors so I've
shared some tips. I think I shared four or five step process on how to find a
mentor and develop that mentor-mentee relationship. Check that out, we'll
include the link to that episode in the show notes. Actually, I'll actually put
up the right dial. Check that out because you definitely need a mentor,
somebody who will guide you. It doesn't matter where you are. It was
episode #150, it's called Have A Mentor. Check that out because once again
a mentor will be helpful and will transform your life in ways that you can't
even imagine right now.
Number four, read the news. I'm a personal ... like my personal belief is
don't read the news, it's very controversial. Don't read all of the news. I
don't check the news, I don't watch TV, I don't check any kind of news
outlets and things because I don't want to ... I want to filter what I get, what
information I get, but check relevant news. For instance, a great blog to
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

6

follow, there's a couple of them. A great blog that I read at least once a week
or I try to read once a week, and it actually gets delivered to my inbox it's
called The Abundance Insider by Peter Diamandis. If you go to, I think it's
abundanceinsider.com or if you Google abundance insider you can
subscribe to that, it's absolutely free. Once a week you will get news on all
the technological updates, like a very distilled newsletter like email of all of
the top, top, top things. It takes me less than 10 minutes to read through
them, maybe five or seven minutes and click the links that I'm interested
in.
Something like that, find something where you will get your information but
don't let it be information, as Tony Robbins says, don't let it be information
that you click bait and information is being force on you and that's
marketed to. Make it information that is actually, that you've selected by
choice. Make a conscious selection of what you're going to be reading and
why and what's it going to about, how is it going to help your career.
Five, apply to the right company. Make sure that you ... when you're like ...
a lot of time people make this mistake, they're applying to companies that
their open positions they'll apply to everything. There's a cool company and
they just want to apply to that right away. You need to understand how is
that going to, how is that position actually to enhance your career and what
is it going to do for you. It's not like, especially when you go to an interview
it's not about just them understanding if you're the right candidate for
them, it's also about you understanding if they're the right company for
you. This is ... at the end of the day, this is your time that you are
investing, this is the most valuable resource that you have, the most
valuable commodity that we all have, something that we cannot restore.
You're investing your time into them or you will be investing you time into
them when you're working with them so you want make sure it's the right
choice. Make sure you ... like less is more.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

7

Rather than applying to a hundred positions, pick the two or three that
really matter to you, that you really believe in, and you can relate to their
missions and visions and values. Do your research on those and really
prove to them that you care and that you want to work there. That's the
way to get a really great role in a company in data science, doing data
science.
Number six, network. This is probably by far the most important tip. You
probably have heard the statistic. We've mentioned or I've mentioned a
couple times in the podcast that about 70% of jobs are filled behind the
scenes, like 70% of the jobs are filled never advertised, it's never a job
position posted online that you can apply to, none of that. You only see, all
these jobs that you see that's like 30% of the job positions. The reality is
that most of the jobs are filled behind the scenes through connections,
through somebody knowing somebody, recommending somebody,
somebody referring somebody, internally they post the job description
things like that.
That is where you need to be. You need to network, you need to connect
with people, you need to talk to them and be in the middle that because
that's how jobs will come to you. For instance, if you've been listening to the
podcast, at the very end I always ask our guests, is it okay like, how can I'll
just connect with you and share a couple of ways, Twitter, Facebook and so
on. I always ask them is it okay to connect on LinkedIn if they don't
actually mention it themselves.
A good starting point is connect with all our guest on LinkedIn and maybe
message the ones that you're actually ... you are interested in their podcast
and you really listen to it and you want to learn more and you want to have
something to say. That's a great way to establish these connections and
build these networks. There's other ways of course, you can go to meetups,
go to conferences, go to events, go to ... connect with a group of colleagues
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

8

or go to meet like places where data scientists gather, hackathons or
things, and really, really network and get in that space.
For instance, next week you'll hear from our guest, Randy Lau, who built a
huge successful career in data science. Within a year, within one year, he
built a career and through networking, he has gone in two jobs. Just over
the passed year, he's gotten to ... he's got multiple job offers but now he's
got two jobs that he is working in in data science just through networking,
just through building connections in the space of data science and mostly
this was done therapy LinkedIn. Look out for that podcast, that will be next
week and you'll learn exactly the steps that you need, the exact steps that
he took to build a career in one year. That is probably by far the most
important step that you can take, number six, to network.
There we go. That's the data science gap, and that's what you can do about
filling it in from your side and standing out from the crowd. Don't worry.
The bottom line is the demand for data science is definitely there, you just
need to do everything you can to stand out from the crowd and be the data
scientist that everybody else wants, the company's want, and we'll do our
part on helping educate businesses on how to better write those job
descriptions and how to better find them. Hopefully together we can all
bridge this data science gap so everybody is happy in the end. On that note,
I hope you enjoyed today's podcast. I look forward to you back here next
time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/188

9

