SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 158
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
RAPID PLANNING
METHOD

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

1

This is FiveMinuteFriday, episode number 158, the Rapid Planning Method.
Welcome to the Super Data Science podcast, ladies and gentlemen. If you're
new, welcome, welcome, welcome. If you've been with us for a while, then
welcome back. Today, I wanted to say that it's that time of the year again.
It's May, and Tony Robbins is bringing Date with Destiny to Australia. If
you've been with the podcast for over a year, you'll know that last May, in
2017, I went to Date with Destiny in Gold Coast and had an amazing time.
It was a fantastic event. Six days of super intense work, of super intense
self-discovery, self-exploration, 10-12 to sometimes 14 hours per day,
sometimes we were finishing past midnight. I'm going this year again. Very,
very much looking forward to it. If you're going to be there, then stop by,
say hi.
Today's podcast is about something that Tony Robbins teaches. This is
about the Rapid Planning Method. I totally understand that not everybody
can be at a Date with Destiny event, whether it's location, time, finance.
There's many reasons why one of these might not be accessible. However,
what I wanted to point out is that just recently, I discovered for myself the
Tony Robbins Breakthrough app. This is an app where you can get a lot of
the things that Tony Robbins teaches at his events and through his books
and other ways. You can get them on an app. It's available on the App
Store, so for Apple, and it's available for Android on Google Play. The best
part is that I've already learned quite a few things from there and I haven't
paid a cent. You can get the app, and there's a lot of free content there that
you can learn if you don't want to purchase any courses, which are quite
expenses. Let's be honest, they're in the hundreds or thousands of dollars
sometimes.
But even if you don't want to purchase them, there's a lot of free content
that you can already pick up some things from. Today, I wanted to give you
an example of one of those things that I learned from this app that we're
actually deploying to the whole business of Super Data Science. Everybody
or the whole team in Super Data Science is focusing or has been focusing in
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

2

this month of May on learning this specific technique because it is so
powerful. Here we go. The technique is called or the method is called the
Rapid Planning Method, or the RPM. What it's all about is about how you go
about setting your goals, whether it's for the day, the week, the month, the
year, and how you go about achieving them. It's a method that will enable
you to get things done, to get things done better, faster, more efficiently,
and have fun and meaning in your life along the way.
That's what I really love about it, all those things combined, and its
simplicity as well. Again, the abbreviation is RPM, Rapid Planning Method.
But, the abbreviation can also be used to help remember what the method
is all about, how to break down the method, what the steps in the method
are. There are three steps. The first step is the R, which is result, right? A
lot of the time, when we create our to-do lists, we focus on the actions.
Have a meeting with so and so, or read this book, or go here, or work on
this project, or spend some time writing this, or write this for three hours,
or something like that. A lot of the time, we get caught up thinking of the
actions. But, this method teaches you about looking at it in a different way.
It teaches you to think about the results, about what outcome do you
actually want from this project or from this activity or from this meeting.
If you think about it that way, it's a completely different story. For instance,
instead of saying, "Have a meeting with Michael," you say, "Meet with
Michael and get clarity on x, y, and z," or, "Decide this," or, "Decide that."
Or, for instance, instead of saying, "Work on the website design," you will
say, "Have a completed website design by 5:00 PM Thursday." That's the
final outcome that you actually want, that's what you're aiming for. It
doesn't matter how you get there. The actions, they can change. There's lots
of different ways to get to the destination. You need to write down the
destination that you're looking for, that you're aiming to get to as your
outcome. That's the R. It stands for result. The next one is probably the
most important one. It's the purpose.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

3

P stands for purpose. What does that mean? Well, you need a purpose for
doing something. If you're doing something, like, say you're creating a
design for a website, or for instance, let's say in data science. You're
creating a model. Have this model created. Your result is have this model,
have the logistic model ready and tested by Thursday, 5:00 PM. That's
great. That's a great result. But, what's the purpose behind that? Is there a
purpose? If nobody is ever going to use that model, if nobody is ever going
to get benefit from it, or you're not going to learn anything in the process, or
you're not going to impact anybody's life, if you just create a model for the
sake of creating a model and there's no purpose to it, then you're not going
to be driven to do it. As soon as challenges come up, you're going to say to
yourself, "Well, this is not important anyway. Nobody cares. I'm not learning
anything. Nobody is going to use this model. It's not going to impact
anybody." You're going to drop it or procrastinate. You're not going to find
the power to go through it.
The purpose is what gets you through, keeps you pushing when times are
tough, when the challenges come up. In this case, for instance, let's say
you're creating a model so that your business can serve your customers
better. Your purpose would be so that our customers get amazing, fantastic
service. Or, for instance, the purpose could be that you're training, you're
just practicing, you're learning. You could say, "So that I learn how to
create logistic regression models very well," or, "I become very proficient at
logistic regression models and empower my career." What you will feel
through these two examples that I gave is that the purpose has to be
emotional, right? A lot of the time, people get caught up, and we saw this in
our business as well. People get caught up in writing the purpose as the
next step, so create a logistic regression model so that we can deploy it, and
so on. That's just the next step. That's mechanical.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

4

The purpose has to be, what is the end benefit for the world, for you, for
others, for friends, for anything? What's the final benefit that you envision
with this project? It has to be something that's emotional, that will trigger a
fire in your heart when you read it. That is what's going to push you
forward. The first one, the result, is the what. The P, the purpose, is the
why, right. Why are we doing this in the first place? What's the point of
this? In fact, the purpose is actually 80% of your success. If you have a
great purpose, that you know why you're doing it, then that's going to push
you to find ways how to do it. This brings us to the third and final step, is
the M, which stands for Massive Action Plan, or in short, MAP. Tony
Robbins abbreviates it to MAP as well.
The Massive Action Plan is what actions do you need to get there? It's the
how. You have the what, you have the why, and finally, you get to the how.
As you can see, the how is at the end. A lot of the time, we get caught up in
creating to-do lists that are all about the how, have a meeting, do this and
that, and spend time on this, read this book, and so on. But, in the RPM
method, the how is actually at the very end. It's the least important part.
Because if you have a great result that you're aiming for, clear result, the
point of the result has to be very, very clear. For instance, Tony Robbins
gives this example, lose some weight is not a clear enough result because it
doesn't have a deadline and it doesn't have how much the weight you want
to lose. Well, you lost one pound, there you go, you're done, you lost some
weight. What about lose 15 pounds by 30th of July? That's a very clear
result. Or make more money. Are you making an extra dollar? There you
go, that's done.
Again, it doesn't have a deadline, doesn't have clarity around it. How much
more money? Or, how about earn an extra $10000 by 1st of August? That's
much clearer. Your result has to be clear, your purpose has to be
something meaningful and something emotional, something that's going to
push you forward, something that's going to inspire you. Then, finally, your
how, your action. Well, once you have those first two, your brain will figure
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

5

out ways to come up with actions. You will have the flexibility, the room to
explore different ways. There's lots of ways to getting to one goal as we
discussed. There's not just one way to get to that goal that you want, right.
As long as you have a goal and you have that fuel, which is the emotion
which is fueling your power to get there, to get forward, to go and keep
pushing through challenging times, you will find ways to get there.
That's why the Massive Action Plan is just like 20% of your success. 80% is
the purpose, 20% is the how you get there. A lot of the time, we get
confused and we focus too much on how we get there. That really limits our
scope, that limits our vision, and we're focused on doing this one thing. We
think that the only way to, I don't know, to building this logistic regression
model is to perform x, y, and z steps that we've predefined ourselves. But if
you set yourself that goal and a purpose, then you'll find many different
ways to get there and then you can pick the fastest and most efficient one.
That's the Rapid Planning Method in a nutshell. That was a very quick
explanation for the sake of this FiveMinuteFriday. You can learn more
about it in the free content over the Breakthrough app, which I highly
recommend.
Even if you don't want to get the Breakthrough app, that's totally cool as
well because this method is available on YouTube. There's a YouTube video.
There's a couple. But, when you search for Rapid Planning Method Tony
Robbins, look for the one that's not eight minutes, but the one that's 15
minutes. The eight minutes is like, I don't know why they cut it in half.
That's just a short version or it's just cut version. Find the one that's 15
minutes long or about 15 or 17 minutes long. That's the one that you want.
He explains the same thing that I just described in his own words, and
much more in detail, and much more emotional, and you'll feel the power of
it.
Once again, this is ... I found it an extremely powerful method for myself.
I'm learning now how to think differently, how to use this method to allow
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

6

my brain to think in terms of results rather than actions, and all of the
Super Data Science team, which is like 20 people or almost 20 people, we
are all focusing on that as well. We are all focusing on thinking of results,
purpose, and Massive Action Plan. Hope you enjoyed this. I am sure if you
adopt it in your career, it will skyrocket everything you do and how you get
things done. I look forward to seeing you back here next time. Until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/158

7

