SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 136
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
www.sdsblockchain.com

-

LEARN
BLOCKCHAIN
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

1

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 136: Learn Blockchain.
All right, welcome ladies and gentlemen to this super-exciting episode
because we've got a super-exciting announcement for you. This week on
Tuesday, we launched our fourth Kickstarter, and the topic for this
Kickstarter is... you guessed it, Blockchain.
Once again, Hadelin and I are teaming up to take on one of the world's
most disruptive technologies, and this time it's Blockchain.
You may have heard about Blockchain before. To me, it crept up quite
unexpectedly. I was definitely looking out for AI and deep learning and
seeing what things progressed in that space, but Blockchain was, first of all
a mystery to me but also, I was not expecting the power and the amount of
disruption it would bring.
To be honest, from what I know about Blockchain now I can see now that
it's completely redesigning whole, not just companies, but industries on the
fly and it's happening so quickly. Much faster. The integration of
Blockchain is happening much, much faster than even Artificial
Intelligence.
And that's what makes us so excited about this technology. About what it
can do. Blockchain can be applied virtually anywhere. Anywhere you need
trust, where you need some sort of authority or some sort of intermediary to
create trust, Blockchain can be applied there. Anywhere where you have a
necessity for privacy, Blockchain can be applied there. Anywhere where you
need a necessity for transparency, Blockchain can be applied there.
Blockchain can be applied almost anywhere, from transportation to
logistics to health care to online voting to media distribution to pretty much
any industry. Just name any industry, Blockchain can be applied there.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

2

And that's what also makes us so excited - the versatility of the
applications.
And on the other hand as well, Blockchain isn't as complex a topic as AI.
Blockchain is definitely much more down-to-earth, it's seemingly much
easier to understand in the sense that there's no A3C algorithm or there's
no Boltzmann Machines like in deep learning - some very, very
sophisticated things that require complex mathematics. The concepts inside
Blockchain are quite easy to grasp on their own but what I found extremely
difficult, while trying to learn Blockchain for myself over the past couple of
weeks or even months now, what I found extremely difficult is the volume the volume of these different concepts.
This technology, even though it's only been developed for around 10 years
now, since the launch of Bitcoin, since it's only been around for that long,
there are so many components. From distributed peer-to-peer networks to
Byzantine fault tolerance to consensus protocols for proof of work to proof
of stake consensus protocols, immutable ledgers and so on. Every time you
think you've got your head around something, something new pops up.

And that's also why we're so excited about this course. That's what our
mission is this time, to as always, make the complex simple. And in this
specific case, it's not just to break down very complex individual topics
such as the A3C algorithm in Artificial Intelligence into bite-size chunks but
to break down this whole technology of Blockchain and its myriad of
components to break it down and put it back together in such a way that
will help you go through this course and understand and develop a holistic
- my favorite word this time round - understanding of what this technology
is all about. Because that's where the value is.
Anybody can go and look up one of these topics like Byzantine fault
tolerance on YouTube and understand it. But, it's about the linking them
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

3

up together, to actually present it in such a way that anybody not just
understand one topic, but the whole thing holistically.
And that's what the challenge is for us. For Hadelin and I. And that's why
I'm recording today's 5 Minute Friday episode is because today we need
your help.
We need your help to make this project go viral.
We want to bring this technology to the world. We can see how it's going to
change industries, lives, companies, countries even. And at the same time,
we don't want this technology to be held only by those people that are
capable of using it, like a select few individuals - like a couple of hundred
few. We want everyone to have access to it.
And that's why we're creating this course and we need this Kickstarter to go
viral and we need your help.
So how can you help us?
First thing is of course, I need to tell you where the Kickstarter is. So, it's
very hard to share a link on a podcast, that's why we've set up a special
URL that you can find this Kickstarter - it will redirect you to the
Kickstarter.
The URL is very simple: sdsblockchain.com. SuperDataScience is
abbreviated to SDS.
If you go there, you'll be redirected to the Kickstarter and there, so how can
you help us? Of course, if you're interested in learning this technology, if
you want to be part of this disruptive revolution, then back our campaign.
That will be a huge, massive help. That will build that social proof that will
show people that there are students out there who already know us, trust
us and believe in the fact that we can put this course together.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

4

Second option, if you're not interested in Blockchain for whatever reason or
if you cannot afford to back this campaign, even though we - because we
want to bring this technology to the world - we tried to make the pledge
levels as affordable as possible. But if you cannot afford to back the
campaign, there's an option at the very top called HadCoin Supporter. Oh
yeah, in this course Hadelin is going to create his own cryptocurrency - he'll
show you how to create a cryptocurrency and it's going to be called
HadCoin. Basically, there's this option at the top called HadCoin Supporter
- it's a $1 option. So even if you can pledge $1 to show us your support,
that would be extremely helpful because again, that will show others that
there are people who trust in us, who believe us and who are willing to
support us, even if it's in that way. And for us, we'd really appreciate that
type of support.
And of course finally, if you can share this link with your network sdsblockchain.com - if you can share this around on Facebook, on
LinkedIn, on Twitter, on Instagram - wherever you are - by email to your
friends, to your family, to your network - if you could share it, that would
be huge help to us. The more people that get to know about this, the better,
and the more lives we can impact, the more industries we can change, the
more companies and people we can help. And that's our goal ultimately.
So there we go, that's the course. As usual, you'll get lots and lots of
content. We're planning on creating three modules. In Module 1, we're going
to show you how to create a Blockchain which you can use absolutely for
anything. In Module 2, we're going to show you how to create a
cryptocurrency of your own and in Module 3, we're going to teach you how
to work with Ethereum and smart contracts and how to create your own
smart contract and how to create an ICO. We're going to simulate an ICO an initial coin offering - in Module 3. And as usual, we're going to have
Intuitions so I'm doing the Intuition tutorial in every single module and
Hadelin is doing the practical tutorials.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

5

So you'll learn tons and tons of different tools, from Blockchain to Bitcoin to
Ethereum to Python, Solidity, JSON, Ganache, Postman, MyEtherWallet,
Anaconda, Flask, Spyder and others. And of course, on the Intuition side,
you're definitely going to get a lot of content. There's actually a list of
planned tutorials on the Kickstarter page, so you if you go there, you can
check them out and see what's going on there.
There we go - I'm going to stop the rant now. I hope to see you on the
Kickstarter. Once again, it's at www.sdsblockchain.com (all one word) and
let's make this happen together. The Kickstarter is already launched, it's
already going, and we need you onboard. We need your help and support.
And thank you so much for being here today. I can't wait to see you inside
Blockchain A-Z!

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/136

6

