SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 208
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
RE-LIVE
DSGO2018

http://www.superdatascience.com/208

This is FiveMinuteFriday, Re-live the DataScienceGO 2018.
Welcome back to the SuperDataScience podcast, ladies and gentlemen, we
are very excited to have you on the show today.
And today we've got a super-important and possibly life-changing
announcement for you.
As you probably know by now, a month ago we had the DataScienceGO
2018 conference. This was our second annual event. It was a major blast,
there was over 300 data scientists in attendance, people flying in from 23
countries all over the world to attend this event, 27 speakers, 19-plus hours
of content. It was jam-packed with networking connections and lots and
lots of value. And today you have an opportunity to relive that experience.
And what I'm talking about here is the recordings from the event.
So we had two rooms and we were professionally, recording with
professional equipment both rooms at the same time. We recorded all of the
talks, so that if you did attend the event and there was something that, a
talk that you really, really liked and possibly you maybe didn't manage to
take all of the notes that you wanted to, then by getting the DataScienceGO
recordings you can go and rewatch, relive that talk and get all of the value,
get all of the content that the speaker shared in their presentation. In
addition, if you attended DataScienceGO, you would have noticed that there
is no way that you would have possibly been able to attend all of the talks
because we had the two parallel rooms running, and even if you really
wanted to attend every single talk it's just physically impossible to be in
both rooms at the same time. And that just stands to show how many
people wanted to come to this event and give back to the community and
present.
And so, if there are talks that you missed simply because of that, the fact
that there's two rooms running, then that's where the DataScienceGO
recordings will help you out, because you can jump on there and you can

http://www.superdatascience.com/208

watch every single talk. Both rooms are recorded so there's nothing that
you will possibly miss.
And on the other hand, if you weren't able to attend DataScienceGO 2018
for whatever reason, this is the next best thing. Although you're not going
to be able to get all of the same value, you won't be able to network with
people, meet the speakers, shake their hands and get that value of actually
being there, this is indeed the next best thing. You can get these recordings
and watch all of the presentations by the speakers. We had 27 speakers
from all over the world as mentioned, it's 19-plus hours of content, of Data
Science valuable content, on all different topics, on technical, nontechnical, soft skills, hard skills, presentation skills, beginners, advanced,
business owners, executives and entrepreneurs, Data Science in all areas,
all fields.
You'll find talks by Hadelin, by me, by Pablos Holman, our keynote speaker,
yes his talk will be there, Tarry Singh, Eric Weber, Randy Lao, and many
many more speakers who attended the event, so you will be able to get your
hands on all of those. So that goes to show, if you missed something, you
want to relive something, or you didn't attend DataScienceGO you can get
all of the talks here, plus you will get a login password to the
DataScienceGO portal, and if you find a talk that is valuable to a friend, a
colleague, for as you maybe were at DataScienceGO and you saw a talk that
is valuable to your boss who wasn't there, you can send him the credentials
and he can log in through your account and have a look at that talk that
you think will be valuable to him. Or there might be, they might have a
whole department of Data Scientists that you want to share this with, then
that's another way you can do that.
Also, you will find, another thing that we did include this time because of
the multiple requests that we got is, with every single talk you will get the
presentation slides of the speakers. Yes, we heard you, we heard that that
is something that's very important to you, and that's why this time we've
requested from all the speakers, all of the slides are waiting for you in the
http://www.superdatascience.com/208

DataScienceGO portal so as you watch the video you'll be able to download
the slides and follow along or just revisit the slides at your own leisure. So
yes, they are included there.
So once again, there's lots of speakers, plus the panels were recorded, the
opening and the closing keynotes were recorded, and of course the talk by
Pablos Holman, our keynote speaker, is in there as well.
So there we go, that's available for you to get your hands on for the next
couple of days until mid next week. You can find the recordings, if this is
something that you're interested in, in joining and becoming part of, you
can find the recordings for DataScienceGO at
www.DataScienceGO.com/recordings. There's a special offer running that
will be available only for the next couple of days, so if this is something that
you're interested in, if you want to take your Data Science career to the
next level, if you came to DataScienceGO or you missed out on
DataScienceGO and you want to have that experience for life, have lifetime
access to it, then this is your opportunity to do this. The recordings are
available at 50 percent off just for the next couple of days. And they are at
www.DataScienceGO.com/recordings. Don't miss this opportunity to
skyrocket your Data Science career.
I look forward to seeing you back here next time, and until then, happy
analyzing.

http://www.superdatascience.com/208

