SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 184
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
FIFO VS LIFO

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

1

This is Five Minute Friday, episode number 184, FIFO versus LIFO.
Hello and welcome back to the Super Data Science Podcast, ladies and
gentlemen. Today, we've got a bit of a nerdy episode. I'll admit this one's
quite nerdy. What is it about?
Sometimes we talk about the importance of domain knowledge in data
science. That is true. Domain knowledge is extremely important. The
technical aspects of our roles as data scientists and the skills are extremely
transferrable. The algorithms that you are applying one day at a
pharmaceutical company, you might be applying at a railway operations
company and then, another day, you might be applying it at a space
agency, and another day you might applying at a bank.
Those components of our roles are transferrable. We are lucky that way,
that we can very quickly adapt to the environment. But that adaptation
actually requires some effort, and that effort is to acquire the domain
knowledge. And domain knowledge is what are the specifics of the
pharmaceutical industry? What are the specifics of a railway company or
the railway industry? What are the specifics of the space industry? And
what are the specifics of the bank that you're working for now?
And so in order to acquire this domain knowledge, I've developed some tips
and tricks and hacks over the years, and today I want to share one of them
with you, and this one is called the FIFO versus LIFO. So what does it
stand for? Well, if you are a programmer, like a hard core programmer, and
you've worked with Assembler before, then you will know what I'm talking
about. FIFO stands for First In, First Out. LIFO stands for Last In, First
Out. And also, you will probably know what I'm talking about if you are an
accountant, because this is important in accounting, as well.
And so what are these two concepts and why are they important? Well,
these concepts are related to how things or items or assets or data is
processed, or how it is dealt with in a process. And the names speak for
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

2

themselves. First In, First Out means that if you have an element, whether
it's some data or it's a physical asset. It might be a burger. It might be a
car. It might be a person standing in queue. Basically, FIFO means an
element that came first or entered a system first will be the first one to leave
it. They leave in that order. So if you have elements A, B, C, and they
entered in that order, A, B, C, then they will leave in that order, A, B, C.
And we'll have a couple examples just now.
But before that, LIFO stands for the opposite, Last In, First Out. So if
elements entered in the order A, B, C, they will leave in the order C, B, A.
So let's have a look at a couple examples to make this a bit clearer, and
then we'll understand how this is actually valuable in understanding
domain knowledge and data science.
So examples of FIFO. Another word for FIFO is queue. And this is why. So
for instance, people queuing up to buy movie tickets, that is an example of
FIFO in action, because the first person in the queue will be the first person
to get the ticket and will be the first person out the queue. The last person
in the queue will be the last person to get their ticket and will be the last
person out the queue. So hence, first in, first out.
Another example is warehousing of perishable items. So if, for instance, you
have a grocery store that is warehousing bread, the truck comes and loads
the bread. The bread that comes in first, or the batch that comes in first ...
Let's say that there's a batch that came in first, Batch A, then two hours
later or a day later, Batch B came in, and then Batch C came in another
day later, well, Batch A is gonna be the first one out. Batch B is the second
one out. Batch C is the third one out. Same thing goes for medicine. If
medicine has been warehoused, they use a FIFO system to get it out of the
warehouse, because it's perishable.
If they're using the opposite, a LIFO system, so Last In, First Out, then
they've got a problem, because the medicine that came in first is gonna stay
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

3

around for a very long time, and it's gonna expire. So that's not necessarily
gonna work, in that case.
So you can see the domain knowledge coming in. So if you're in a grocery
store or you're in a movie business or you're working as a data scientist for
a medical company, a pharmaceutical company, you already can see the
value of this.
All right, what's another example? Another example is a phone answering
queue. If you're on the phone to a bank and they've got support
representatives answering the phone, then again, it's first in, first out,
because if it was the other way, then the person who called first would be
on the phone forever. Another example is cars being loaded onto a twosided ferry, or cars using a two-sided ferry. So a two-sided ferry is one of
those that you have in Europe, that are crossing these rivers all the time.
I'm sure there is in other parts of the world, as well. I was just recently on
one myself. You enter on one side. Then your car goes to the end. Then it
crosses the river and then the opposite side opens and then you drive out.
So in those cases, usually the cars that come in first are let out first.
Whereas, if it's a ferry with one side, like a long distance ferry that goes on
for 10 hours, usually they only have one entrance. So the cars get in. They
get packed, and so basically, the cars that come in last are blocking the
cars that came in first, so therefore, the cars that came in last will go out
first. So that's a LIFO system. So you can see, even in ferries, there can be
two types of approaches, FIFO versus LIFO.
So that brings us to LIFO. LIFO is Last In, First Out. We already had that
example with the ferries. So let's have a look at a couple more. And by the
way, another way of saying LIFO is STACK, because when you stack things
up, like you stack up books onto a table, the first book that you stacked
will be at the bottom. You cannot pick it out first, because the whole thing
will tumble. So you have to pick up the top book first, so the book that you
put in last. So a stack of books will be a LIFO example.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

4

Another example of LIFO is cement bags. So when you're warehousing the
cement bags, you're gonna be stacking them on top, and because it's not a
perishable item, it's okay to keep the bottom bags stacked for ages, for
years, perhaps. I'm not an expert in cement, but I don't think anything
would happen negative, especially if the humidity is fine and sunlight is not
getting in. The bottom bag of cement can lie around forever, so there, they
would use a LIFO stacking system, where they would pick up the bag of
cement that was put on last, because otherwise, it would be inefficient.
They're heavy bags and to turn this whole thing over and create a queue
out of cement bags might be an inefficient use of space.
Another one is plates requiring washing at a restaurant. So if you stack up
plates requiring washing, you're obviously gonna wash the one that you put
on last. You're gonna wash it first, LIFO. Another one is plates being loaded
into a plate dispenser. You know those plate dispensers, those balancey
things that we all like to play around with at restaurants or at buffet
tables? So the plates that was put in last will be picked out first.
An in tray for an office worker. So if somebody's working at an office and
they still have an in tray, instead of an email ... I don't think those are
popular any more, but nevertheless, if you have an in tray, and people put
items into your in tray, you're gonna pick up the one that was put in last,
first.
And you can really see, as you're getting a sense for these examples,
industry examples, you can really see. This one, for example, is specifically
valuable, because if you're seeing inefficiencies in data processing or some
process in a business, it could be related to somebody's in tray, just
because they're getting overcrowded with items and they're picking up the
last ones first, and therefore, the ones that should have gone first, or the
ones that were given to them earlier, are being delayed. So there you go.
There's an inefficiency right there.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

5

Another one is you packing your travel bag. When you're going to travel,
you pack your bag. Think about it. The items that you put at the top are
the items that went into the bag last, but they're the ones that are gonna
come out first.
So typically, when the entrance and the exit is the same, then you're gonna
have a LIFO method. When there's an entrance and a separate exit, then
you got a FIFO. That's one way to think about it. Another way to think
about it is queue versus stack. There's lots of ways to think about it.
And so we just rambled through probably 10 different industry examples,
and you might think to yourself, "Well, some of them are useful. Some of
them, you can't really do anything about. That's just the way things work,
perishable items this way, cement this way or that way." And in many
cases, it's true. In many cases, it's just the natural way of things.
But what I'm suggesting here is if you get into the habit of picking up on
these things throughout the day, throughout the course of your week, and
just seeing, "Okay, I'm standing waiting for my burger or for my food. Is
that FIFO or LIFO? I'm picking up this plate. I'm packing my bag. What is
FIFO? What is LIFO?"
Once you get into the habit of doing these things in our day to day world, in
these trivial cases, you will get a sense for it, how to do it in your business,
how to quickly pick up on these things, how to even notice them. A lot of
data scientists don't pay attention to this, and they go through
understanding a business and a business process, and they don't really
notice, "Is this FIFO or is this LIFO?" And they don't see the implications
that that has. And the opportunities that that might yield, or the
consequences it has on the way data is coming in and out of these
processes, or the way that data is being handled, the way that data is
actually being generated and collected.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

6

And so I think it's important to at least be aware of these, and ideally, pay
attention to them, and therefore get value out of these concepts and
understand your industry, your domain knowledge quicker, and grasp
those little details that are intrinsic characteristics, that other data
scientists might have not picked up on, or you wouldn't have otherwise
picked up on.
So on that note, I hope you enjoyed this podcast and this little excursion
into the nerdy world of data science, or I would say even domain knowledge
in data science, and hopefully, this was a helpful tip for you. And if it was,
my challenge for you this weekend would be to try and observe your day to
day and see where you can pick up on FIFO and LIFO and see how many
examples you can pick up in just one weekend.
And hopefully, that will help train your mind to continue doing that next
week, and then throughout the month. And just picking up on these little
details and then seeing what that means for your understanding of your
business and how that can enhance it.
On that note, thank you so much for being here today, and I look forward to
seeing you back here next time. Until then, happy analyzing!

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/184

7

