SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 156
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
PARKINSON’S LAW

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/156

1

This is FiveMinuteFriday episode number 156, Parkinson's Law. Welcome
back to the SuperDataScience podcast. Today I've got something interesting
I'd like to share with you that happened to me this week. For this story,
we're going to need Parkinson's Law. In case you're not familiar with
Parkinson's Law, I'd like to first describe what it is.
Have you ever experienced a situation where you know that you have
approximately three hours of work to do, but for some reason because you
have five hours of spare time, that work takes up all the five hours. Or, you
might have one or, let's say you have two days of work to do, but you've
been allocated a whole week to finish that project, and somehow those two
days of work end up taking up the full week, the full five days of your work
week to complete anyway.
That phenomenon, the expansion of work to fill the time available to it is
actually called Parkinson's Law. A quick trivia on history, Parkinson's Law
was first mentioned by Cyril Northcote Parkinson in an article published in
the Economist in 1955 and it was the first sentence in that article and it
went like this.
It is a commonplace observation that work expands so as to fill the time
available for its completion, and then the article goes on. That's what
Parkinson's Law is all about. If you can think of work as a gas. If you have a
certain amount of gas, I don't know, like, one kilogram of air, for instance,
and you have a one liter bottle, than that gas will fill up one liter. If you
have a 10 liter bottle, that gas will fill up 10 liters. As the gas expands to fill
all the spaces provided to it, and so does work. As much as you have time
to complete a certain task, that's how much time that task will take up.
The story that happened to me this week goes as follows. Today's
Wednesday and on Friday evening I need to be in Bali. That means that I
need to get some time between now and then, I need to get on a flight, on a
six hour flight and go there. I already knew this quite a while ago, but on
Monday, I needed to finalize the flights, and pick when I'm going. I had two
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/156

2

choices. Out of the available flights, and due to other circumstances, I
could have gone to Bali on Thursday or I could have gone on Friday.
But I know that I need to be there on Friday, so why would I ever decide to
go on Thursday? Why not stay an extra day in Australia and spend it
working because I also had quite a lot of work to do. I had quite a few
tutorials to record, some podcasts, and some other things that I needed to
do here, that I actually needed to be present in Australia to perform them.
Therefore, it makes sense to give myself as much time as possible to
complete all the tasks. In that sense, I would buy the ticket to go to Bali on
Friday, so I'd have the full week, or the full four days, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, to work and then Friday morning I would get on a
flight and go to Bali. I decided not to do that, and instead, I decided to apply
Parkinson's Law.
I thought to myself, okay, I have an X amount of work to do and it feels like
I will get it done in four days. From Monday to Thursday I'll probably get it
done. But then, I thought to myself, what if I only had three days? What if I
put myself in the situation where I know I only have three days, and instead
of spending an extra day in Australia working, I can spend that extra day, I
can go fly to Bali on Thursday, and probably still going to find a way to get
all that work done.
It made total sense in that approach, like, we can all ... Like, another thing I
thought to myself, we can always keep working all the time, and forget to
relax, and forget to just spend some alone time, things like that. Eventually,
what I ended up doing is, buying the tickets for Thursday morning, and
putting myself in the circumstance where I only had three days to do that
amount of work, which I thought I could comfortably do in four days.
I basically did the Parkinson's Law in reverse. I knew that I have a gas
which takes up four liters, and I knew as well, that I could squeeze it into
three liters and it would be fine. Finally enough, right now, it's Wednesday
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/156

3

evening, 7 p.m. and I'm sitting here, and I've done everything. I've recorded
a good close to 20 tutorials for two different courses, and I've done a lot of
other tasks, and a few meetings, and things like that.
Eventually, I ended up putting everything into those three days anyway and
I'm going to go a day early and have a rest. That's what it's about and it's
important, I guess, to understand this law sometimes and catch yourself.
For me, it's a good example. I have not done this before, usually I would
always give myself as much time as possible to get everything done. But
here, I was able to do the things I needed to do and delegate the things that
somebody else could do.
I'm pretty sure, looking back, I'm pretty sure, if I had bought the flights for
Friday, the same exact thing would happen, except for it would take me
four days. I would get exactly the same amount of work done, I wouldn't
have gotten more work done. I wound up getting exactly the amount of
work that I did, but it would just take me four days because I would
procrastinate somewhere or I would spend a bit longer doing something
else. I'll become, like, try to be too perfectionist about a certain task, and
things like that.
There you go, just a story from my life experience from this week on how
work expands or contracts. Hopefully, like, I definitely learned something
from experience. Hopefully from sharing with you that allowed you to
maybe also see something for yourself in that experience. Maybe looking
back, you can think of situations where you've been affected by Parkinson's
Law in either a good way or in a bad way. I think that's resinating with
these things or recalling them in your memory, can help then, be more
practive about how much time you allocate to certain tasks in the future.
It's probably not really applicable to the weekend, even though you might
have some tasks on the weekend that you can apply Parkinson's Law to,
but maybe next week, give it a go. See if you can apply Parkinson's Law in
reverse to save yourself some time, and maybe go home early, or have a
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/156

4

longer lunch break, or if you can't do either of those, spend some time
learning something online instead of spending the same amount of time
working and getting that same amount of work done that you could've
gotten done sooner or faster. That's Parkinson's Law, hope you enjoyed the
story, I look forward to seeing you back here next time. Until then, happy
analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/156

5

