SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 198
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
TWO MILLIMETER
SHIFTS

http://www.superdatascience.com/198

This is FiveMinuteFriday episode 198. This is five minute Friday, episode
number 198, Two Millimeter Shifts. Welcome back to the Super Data
Science podcast, ladies and gentlemen. Super excited to have you on board
today, and this week on the show we had Carl Massy, who's the author of
the Guidebook to Happiness. If you listen to the episodes, let me know. Did
you feel the energy? Did you feel the positivity going through your
earphones and filling you up? I totally enjoyed it. I really enjoyed this
episode. It was so much fun, and I actually felt really relaxed talking to
Carl.
If you miss this episode, make sure to check it out. That was episode 197,
with Carl Massy. It's great, great, just a great chat that we had. And today
what I wanted to talk about is a tip I had for you, in terms of some of the
things that Carl mentioned. So some of the advice and ideas for a happier
life that Carl talked about, some of the things that we went through from
his book, were related to like a mindset, and positive thinking, and being in
the right state and things like that. So those are very, very useful hacks.
You should definitely look into applying them and seeing how they can
benefit your life.
But what are we talking about today can help you out with the hacks that
more related more to physical activities, and things that you can actually
do. For instance, we talked about exercise and we talked about meditation.
So how do you get in the habit of exercising every day? Or how do you get
in the habit of meditating every day? It's great to say, and it's probably easy
to say, but it's much harder to do to, for instance, say that I'm going to
meditate 20 minutes a day from now on. Because how many times have you
been a situation, where you decide to develop a habit and then you follow
through for five days, or six days or wherever it is?
Then something gets in the way, things slip through and you just forget
about it, or you lose track and you miss out once, you miss out twice, and
http://www.superdatascience.com/198

then it just kind of like stops there, and nothing else happens?So, we want
to avoid that situation. We want to develop that habit, it takes about
Charles Duhigg in his book, The Power of Habit, talks about developing
habits. It takes about 30 to 60 days to develop a habit. So how can we ease
this process of developing a habit? That's where I want to share a tip with
you that my coach gave me like literally this week, and it is called Two
Millimeter Shifts.
So we'll start with a visualization, imagine that you have like a huge laser
line. It's kind of like a laser pointer line, and laser beam going out of your
head, out of your face, like straightforward for 1,000 kilometers. Straight
ahead for 1,000 kilometers. Now imagine what will happen to that beam if
you tilt your head to the right by two millimeters. But like two degrees, well
we're going to just say millimeters, so that we stay in line with the concept
of the title of the episode. You shift your head to the right by two
millimeters, right? What will happen to that line?
Well near you, the line will look pretty much identical. We'll just tilt it a tiny
little bit, but as you go further away from your face and further along this
line, you will find that it's shifted more and more and more. In fact, a
thousand kilometer line, if you shift your head by two millimeters, a
thousand kilometer line would have shifted by 30 kilometers. How crazy is
that? Right? So you just did a two millimeter shift, but this whole line
shifted by 30 kilometers. So you can imagine that if there's a plane that
gets on a course to travel from A to B, and there's a thousand kilometers
between them, or thousand miles between the destinations.
So, if at the very start the plane planes courses tilted by two millimeters,
that's all it takes. If it's tilted by two millimeters, then what will happen is
that the plane will actually land at a destination that is 30 kilometers or 30
miles off course. How insane is that? And that's what we want to use to our
advantage here. We want to take this principle of a two millimeter shift, and
http://www.superdatascience.com/198

apply it to the trajectory of our lives. And so for instance, if you decided that
you want to exercise, like for instance in my case. I've gotten kind of really
slack over the past couple of months, or maybe even longer, a year or so.
I've really stopped exercising, and only rarely do I actually exercise. When is
a gym around the or something like that. And I'm not happy with this.
And so now I've decided I'm going to change this up, I'm going to get into
the habit of exercising. One thing I could've done, I could've said, "Okay, so
now everyday I'm going to go for a five kilometer run, and then every second
day I'm going to do 100 pushups and, and then I'm going to go for a swim
and things like that." So, like set myself the actual destination that I want
to get to. I want to be exercising every day, and I want to be running, and
want to be swimming, and I want to be doing lots of pushups and things
like that. So I could have set that for myself as a goal. What that would
have probably ended up in is, one of those scenarios, I would have done
that for 10, 12 days or whatever. Then I would have stopped and, like
something would have gotten in the way, like some crisis would have
happened at work or something like that. And yeah, I would just like give
up on the idea.
Instead what I've done now is I've set myself a goal of, "Okay, I'm just going
to wake up, go outside and I'm going to do 20 pushups and that's it." Very
tiny amounts. I know that it's not going to change much in my life. It's only
20 pushups. I'm barely going to even feel that. But I know that this is the
principle of this whole two millimeter shift, that if I start doing 20 pushups
now, and tomorrow do 20, and another 20, Then in five days do 25. Then I
do that for five days, and then I do 30. Then I get her up to 50, then I get up
to 70 pushups. I know that with time, over the course of several months, I'll
get to the destination that I actually want to go.
Like same with this laser line sticking out of your face, do a two millimeter
shift now, no big difference at the onset. But, as you go along the line, the
http://www.superdatascience.com/198

differences becomes greater and greater and greater. And guess what? It
becomes easier to stick to it, because you're slowly developing the habit,
and you're starting small with developing the habit. So that's what you can
do. You can do that and about your exercise goals. You can do that about
your meditation goals. You can do that, but kind of like any types of goals
where you can break them down into a smaller thing. Where you can start
small, and then grow them with time.
So for instance, you don't have to start by meditating 20 minutes a day,
start by meditating for three minutes a day. Then grow that to five in a
week ,and then grow that to seven minutes in a month and progress like
that slowly. So that's one, one tip, that's the main concept of the Two
Millimeter Shift. Very, very powerful thing, and I'm already applying in my
life. I've been doing these pushups for a couple of days now.
The other thing that I wanted to mention is that there's another principle
that you can apply on top of that. That is don't commit to don't commit to
quantity, commit to time. So for instance, even what I'm doing the pushups
20 pushups ... let's look at a different example, let's look at running. For
instance, you decide that you want to run five kilometers everyday. Well
that's awesome, but how much is it going to take you in time? Is it going to
take you 30 minutes? Is it going to take you an hour? Is it going to take you
two hours? You can kind of estimate. But every day is going to be different,
and every day it might take a bit longer, bit shorter, or it might be raining
or might be something else.
And so what you might find is, you could get scared off of the idea of
running, just because you don't know how much time it's going to take. So
instead of committing in terms of kilometers, try committing in terms of
time. So for instance, you could say, all right, I'm going to run today, I'm
going to run every day, but I'm going to go run for 10 minutes. Right. It's a
much easier ask on your psychology, on your mind, on your willpower to, "I
http://www.superdatascience.com/198

only need to run for 10 minutes." Then you run one way for five minutes.
You turn around, run back for five minutes. And that's it. It doesn't matter
how many kilometers you did, you just trying to get into that habit.
Same thing for meditation, same thing. Even with this exercise thing like
pushups, it's kind of easier there because 20 pushups in it only takes a
minute or so to do, or a couple of minutes. But like if I were to say that I
want to go swimming ,or I wanted to do, I'm more kind of like exercise,
more intense exercise, then it would be better to commit in terms of time
rather than quantity. So, that's an extra tip.
So we've got to sum up. Do two millimeter shifts to get yourself into habits,
especially when some kind of activities involved where you can start small
and grow it over time. Because in the long run you want to get to a different
destination. You don't want to get there right now, but you want to get
there eventually. And the second thing is try to commit in terms of time
when you can, rather than in terms of quantity, or distance, or other types
of metrics. Because when you commit time, that's the most valuable
resource we have. And psychologically it's easier for you to make yourself
do something if you know how much time it's going to take.
There we go. Hope you enjoy this episode, and hopefully this will help you
implement some of the hacks that Carl Massy mentioned in his appearance
on the podcast. I wish you a super healthy life, super productive, super full
of energy. I can't wait to see you on the next episode. And until next time,
happy analyzing.

http://www.superdatascience.com/198

