SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 182
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
THE IMPORTANCE
OF DATA SCIENCE
COMMUNITY
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/182

1

This is FiveMinuteFriday, episode number 182, the data science
community.
Welcome back to the super data science podcast, ladies and gentlemen.
Very excited to have you back on the show. And today, I'd like to reiterate
something that has been mentioned repeatedly on the podcast in the past
three or four episodes. And that is the concept of the data science
community. And rarely do I hear something on the podcast mentioned over
and over again. Sometimes it happens, and books are mentioned, or
techniques and models and algorithms or other concepts are mentioned,
but they're usually spread out. But here, we had literally three or maybe
even four podcasts where integral people were saying the same thing on
and on, and on again. And different people from different countries,
different walks of life, different areas of data science. And I wanted to just
reiterate that so that we see the true value in this.
So Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, Zach Larcher, Matt Corry and I believe Tim
Lafferty as well all mentioned the concept of the data science community,
and how this community that we're all part of is unique. How, in the space
of data science, everybody's extremely friendly. Everybody will always help
you out. Wherever you post a question, whether it's on Stack Overflow and
GitHub, or whether it's on the Tableau forums or on Kaggle competitions.
Wherever you post a question, people will jump in, help you out and provide
some advice, provide some guidance, provide some examples, case studies
of how they've done things.
Where everybody's quite open to sharing their thoughts, their ideas about
developing opensource software. Where people are also expressing ideas
about developing algorithms and creating new packages and once those are
created, those are also shared and we can use them when we constantly see
new R packages, new Python packages, new developments in the space on
TensorFlow, in the space of PyTorch and other areas of data science and
analytics.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/182

2

So I just want us to all, for a second, appreciate how lucky we are that we
are part of this amazing community that we can learn from all the people
that are sharing their videos on YouTube, from all the people that are
posted blogs on LinkedIn, or on Medium or in other sources, for all the free
eBooks and all these other components that help our education in the
space of data science and propel our careers forward. So I'd like for all just
pause for a second to acknowledge that and appreciate that we're part of
this
And then, something that I'd like to ask of you this weekend. It's a small
ask, but I think it's going to make a big difference for the community in
general. Just this weekend, think of something that you received or learned
from the data science community, whether it was some advice, some help,
maybe a blog post, a YouTube video, a comment somebody made. And
think of one that actually really impacted your learning pathway, or what
you chose to learn next, or how you chose to go about your career, or
maybe a certain tool or technique. And first thing, I'll probably encourage
you to tell that person who helped you that they did help you. Because so
many blog posts, so many videos, so many advice and comments, they go
unnoticed. And it doesn't take much to go back there and just post a quick
message to say thank you, or if it's on Medium, give that person a few
claps, or something else. But probably a message, a personal message is
always better, because the person will know they're appreciated, and that
will encourage them to share more.
And coming from a perspective of an instructor, where I teach this, as
myself, it means the world when you hear a great comment when your
content has helped somebody go forward, or your content has helped
somebody empower them in their career and change their life. So highly,
highly encourage doing that. And the second thing would be to think of a
way where you can give back to the community. So if you have never posted
a blog post, or never shared a video, or never shared some source code or
some code that you were working on, or maybe even just shared a link on
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/182

3

LinkedIn, something that you read recently, something that's useful, then
this weekend is the time to do it. This is your chance to give back to the
community and to show the world that you are part of this data science
movement and that you are helping others. And that will, trust me, that will
have ripple effects and others will see it, and others will want to share. And
you will feel so great when somebody says thank you. And imagine if you
can impact somebody's life and help them make the better choice, or make
a better choice in their career.
So if you can write a blog post, write a blog post and share it on LinkedIn. If
you can record a video, record a video and share it on YouTube. If you don't
have time, which can also be the case, but maybe you've read something
recently somewhere. Well, just take that link and add a few of your
comments to it and share on LinkedIn. It'll take you five minutes, but it can
change somebody's life. So let's make this weekend the weekend of the data
science community and let's all share something. At least one thing, and at
least one thank you to somebody who's helped you. This will be epic. Let's
go do it.
All right guys. Have a good weekend, and I'll talk to you next time. Until
then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/182

4

