SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 162
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
10-DAY DETOX

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

1

This is Five Minute Friday 10-Day Detox. Welcome back to Super Data
Science Podcast, ladies and gentlemen. Very excited to have you on the
show, and today's going to be a super special episode. I would love to share
an experience that I had with you.
So it all started a couple of months ago, when my friend and mentor, Vitali
Delgo, whom you probably know from the podcast already, he sent me an
email sharing a link to a YouTube channel, Sailing La Vagabonde. And it's a
great channel. They have hundreds of thousands of subscribers. It's a
couple, Riley and Elena, who sail the world together. They've been doing it
for three years, and you get to see all the challenges and all the beautiful
scenery that they see, all the ways they fix their catamaran, and how they
go fishing, and all these great things that they do and people that they
meet.
And so, they document everything, and it's a blog. So I watched it, I
watched a couple of videos. I was very excited. Vitali's like, "Well, that
would be so cool to do something like this, like go on a quick trip and see
what sailing's all about."
Along those videos, in one of them when Riley and Elena took a break from
sailing, Elena went to a retreat in Bali called Natural Instinct Healing,
where she did a 10-day detox. Basically, it's a 10-day fast. And I watched
that. I got quite excited about that, as well. It was quite random, right? Like
a sailing blog and then a video about a 10-day fast.
And the funny thing is, I was already going to Bali. My friend Stephen
invited me to come over to Bali to hang out for some time, and do some
surfing, and chill out, and see what Bali has become in the past couple of
years. And yeah, so I was coming here for 10 days anyway, and then I was
supposed to go somewhere else.
But then I thought, hey look, I'm already in Bali. I randomly got this email
from Vitali about this sailing blog. I randomly, on that sailing blog, saw a
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

2

video about a 10-day fast. You know, I got to do it. So, I extended my stay
in Bali, and that's where I am right now.
This is Natural Instinct Healing all around. And yeah, so for 10 days, I have
not been eating anything. It is crazy, like literally anything. So it's not just
like no solid food, but I've been having smoothies. No, no smoothies even.
Not even smoothies. It's not just a water fast, it's a juice fast.
There's water, there's juice. So there's green juice, red juice. It's all
vegetable or fruit juice. Then there's broth that you get in the evening at
6:00 PM. So it's just vegetable broth, with nothing else, and you just put
cayenne pepper and salt in it, and some lime. And it tastes divine compared
to everything, like you know, compared to not eating. And finally, you also
get teas, different types of tea like licorice tea, cinnamon tea, ginger tea, and
so on. And that's it for 10 days.
And so what I wanted to share with you, is proof. This is me. I've literally
not eaten anything for 10 days. This is day 11. I started on day one at
about 8:30. It's 8:50 on day 11, so it's been just over 240 hours that I have
eaten nothing, and I feel totally fine. I feel energized, I feel clear in my head,
I feel excited about everything. It's so cool.
And what I wanted to say is that like a lot of the time in life, I have these
stretches where I skip a meal, and I feel oh, I'm missing out. I feel so
hungry. I really, really, want to eat. But in reality, I just went through an
experience where I was not eating for 10 days, and it stands to show that
you will not hurt yourself, ultimately, if you skip ... Or for me, I won't hurt
myself if I skip a meal or even a day of eating, let alone 10 days, right? Or
10 days of eating, lay low one day.
And yeah, so this has been a great experience. What I also wanted to say is
that if you ever want to do something like this, then it might be a good idea
... Check with your doctor. I'm not a health practitioner and dietician, and
so on. But, I wanted to give you a quick overview of what we did here at
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

3

Natural Instinct Healing, in case you're ever in Bali, in case you want to
check out the same exact retreat, because I feel like I got passed this
message from Elena, or Vitali, or through Stephen, and now I feel like I've
got to pass it on, in case you guys ever want to do it.
So, in this retreat ... I just wrote down a couple of things here. So first of all,
weight loss. I don't know how much I've lost weight yet. We're breaking our
fast just now, at 10:00, so I'm gonna go have ... We're gonna have papaya
and a cashew nut yogurt. So, that will be cool. And then we'll be weighing
ourselves up, so I don't know how much I've lost.
And you can see, I'm not really doing it for weight loss. I don't have that
much weight to lose to start with. I started at 68. But people come here ...
Some people come here for weight loss. Some people lose 15 kilos, it's like
30 lb. or so. Like the lady that left just yesterday, she lost 5 kilos, which is
about 10, 12 lb. Yeah, so that's one thing, weight loss.
The other thing, they put out a lot of cool activities. So for instance, we
went for walks. Every second day, every other second day, we went for yoga
or meditation. We also had lots of workshops about digestion, about food,
how it affects your mood, how it affects your emotions, how it affects your
health, what foods are good for you, what foods you need to avoid, and so
on. So, I learned a lot of things along the way.
Plus, it's just very chill. It was really nice to chill out. I didn't do enough of
this, like the mind detox. I was still working here and there, but there were
certain periods of time where I just lay down and read a book. In fact, they
were fully booked out. There were 12 people here this time. And so, I was
staying off-site. You can stay on site. I think they have 10 or eight rooms on
site. I was staying off-site, so I would come here. I would leave my computer
and phone at the Air B&B, and I would come here and just with a book,
and I would chill out, work, not work ... Just do the workshops that they
were giving, and yoga, and whatever else, and then just read a book and
relax.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

4

We also went for spas. We went for different hot/cold/freezing, and saunas,
and pools. I went for a bicycle ride. Lots of interesting and cool things
happen here, and the people are great. So people who come to things like
this are ... You already know in advance that they're gonna be great people,
that they're gonna be people who care about their health, who are health
conscious, who are self-aware, and the conversations have been fantastic. It
was just really nice to meet everybody, really lovely group of people that we
had here.
So, that's what we've been up to. And what else did I want to tell you? Bike
ride, workshops, feeling great, fantastic, yoga walks, and yeah, 10 days no
food. So, that's about fasting. If you've never fasted before, there's different
types of fasting. There's intermittent fasting, where you don't eat for 10
hours per day, I think, and then there's only eight, or actually ... Wait,
sorry. You don't eat for 18 hours a day, and there's only a six-hour period
of time that you eat. There's other ways of fasting.
Again, check with your health practitioner, nutritionist, and so on. Don't
take this as health advice, but I'm just sharing my experience, and I've had
a fantastic time.
So, I hope you enjoyed this episode and hope this inspires you to maybe, if
not fast, then to look at food differently. One of the things that they say is
that a lot of the time we just eat fast food. We're always on the run, always
on the go. We don't spend enough time. What really resonated with me is
that digestion actually starts, not when you put the food in your mouth, but
when you actually, not even smell it or see it, when you think about it.
When you start thinking about food.
Right now, if you think about your favorite food, you think about a dragon
fruit, or a mango, or something, and you will start feeling that saliva coming
into your mouth. That means that your digestion's already actually started.
It starts in the brain. A lot of times we just get quick food, whether it's
UberEats. Nothing bad with UberEats, or McDonald's, or something else.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

5

And we just eat it right away, and so we skip a huge preparatory phase
that's supposed to happen in our body. And then we finish with food, and
we run off.
So at least for me, this experience apart from everything else that I've
learned, it's gonna help me be more mindful and conscious about the food I
eat, and the preparation phase. And so, yeah, hopefully this video or audio,
if you're listening to audio or video, if you're watching this on video, inspires
you at least if not to fast, to be a bit more conscious about food, and take
that extra thought when you are ordering a meal or starting to eat.
On that note, thank you so much for being here. I look forward to seeing
you back here next time. Until then, happy analysing.
By the way, this podcast is available on video. If you'd like to watch it, you
can always go to www.superdatascience.com/162. At the same time, if you
don't have the opportunity right now, if you're driving, or running, or riding
your bicycle, that's totally fine. You can always come and check that video
version out later on, as well. You will get all the same value from this audio
podcast, as well.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/162

6

