SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 206
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
MACHINE
LEARNING IS ALL
AROUND YOU
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

This is Five Minute Friday, episode number 206, Machine Learning is All
Around You. Welcome back to the Super Data Science podcast. Ladies and
gentlemen, very excited to have you here for this Five Minute Friday
episode. Title today is Machine Learning is All Around You. Really it should
actually be Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Artificial Intelligence, and
Data Science are All Around You. Why is that? And how did this episode
actually come to be? Well, I have a few apps on my phone that I'm sure we
all do, which quite heavily utilize these technologies, whether it's data
science, machine learning, deep learning, or AI. We can all think of one or
two, but what I found fascinating is only a couple of them, only like one or
two of them actually trigger in my head this sense of amazement, the sense
of awe at how, how cool they actually are, how they're leveraging these
technologies and they're really, like it really stands out that this is deep
learning. Wow, this is really cool.
But if you think about it, there's plenty, plenty of apps on your phones that
are indeed using this. And I think, I really think that it's a good idea, it's a
very good idea for us as data scientists to actually observe that, to be aware
of when and how these applications are using one of these technologies,
whether it's data science, or deep learning, or AI, machine learning, doesn't
matter. The point is that by being aware of it, by being aware of machine
learning around us in use, we can actually come up with better ideas, we
can think of better applications and maybe dig deeper into certain
algorithms, and basically the point is use what's around you to get inspired.
I'm only using a phone as an example because your phone is always in your
hands, and you're looking at it on average like 115 times per day. It's
become an integral part of us. It's become like an extension of our mind. So
it's the easiest example too. But surely there are other examples of
technologies that use around you during the course of your day or week
that also use these, use deep learning or AI or something like that. What
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

I'm saying is I'm calling on you to be aware of when that happens and try to
pause yourself for a second and look into it further.
As an example, I put a little list together of the technologies that amaze me,
and at the very end I've got like the two that I was talking about, at the end
of this I'll show the two apps that really like blow my mind every time I use
them. They're nothing crazy sophisticated. They're just daily kind or like
weekly usage apps, but they're really cool. But let's go through the list.
First one that I thought of was like a Tesla car. If you have a Tesla, you're a
legend. I've been in a Tesla once. No, I actually, I don't think I've even been
inside a Tesla, like driven, being driving or driven in a Tesla. I know friends
who have, and I hear it's an amazing experience, especially when you can
let go of the steering wheel and it goes in the highway, and it just drives
itself, changes lanes and all those things. That's really cool. That would
blow my mind. I'm really looking forward to that. If you already had that
experience, that's awesome.
One thing is just to enjoy it and to have fun, but the other thing is to think
through how is it doing it, like what kind of ... I know we can't really guess
all these proprietary algorithms, and it's much more complicated and
everything, but is maybe a good idea to think what do I really know in deep
learning or machine learning that it could be using to make these decisions,
or what is it that I could learn from how it's doing it so that to inform my
further education in this space?
Another one is when you type something on your phone like a message and
it gets autocompleted by your phone. That's a clear example of natural
language processing that uses deep learning most likely to figure out what
you're going to say next. And it learns as well. It learns from how you typed
your previous 100 messages or what not and gives you better
recommendations. In fact, you also right now have autoreplies suggestions
in Gmail. If you get an email and then instead of replying a whole text to it,
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

you get these three options. Like somebody invites you to a party and you
can say, "Yes, I'm in," or, "Thank you for the invitation, I will be there," or
it'll be like, "No, unfortunately I can't make it," and you can just click one of
them and send. That makes life easier and that's also another example of
an NLP in action.
Another case is when autocomplete ... when you have ... Now they actually
have in Gmail when you're typing the message, it actually in this faint gray
it will finish the sentence for you. You can just click Tab and you don't have
to finish typing the sentence. I've already used that quite a lot, so that's
another example of an NLP in action. Those are simple applications, simple
use cases, but they're really powerful and they do use some powerful
mechanics or algorithms in the background.
Another cool one, which we use probably on a daily basis, is Google Maps.
How do Google Maps know that there's a traffic jam somewhere along the
road, how do they, how does it know that your route is going to be delayed
by 5 or 15 minutes? Well, we probably all know this by now but
nevertheless Google just analyzes how the phones are moving across the
street. All these phones in the cars, it can see like how fast they're traveling
as opposed to how fast they should be traveling, and so then it decides
whether there's a traffic jam, another example of machine learning in
action.
An even cooler example is an app called Waze, and it's quite popular in the
US, is getting more popular in Australia as well. I was present at an
interview with the founder of Waze, and he described how they actually
created Waze, and this is really fascinating. Waze unlike Google Maps or
Apple Maps, it actually started with no map at all, like it doesn't actually
have a map integrated as a starting point in the app, application. It started
off with just like a blank black screen. Then people who signed up for Waze,
they had the app on the phones and they would move around on the street.
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

Waze, the app itself, would decide, all right, so like 100 people went in this
direction from A along this straight line, that must be a road, and they went
with this speed, and then here they went 60 miles an hour, so that must be
a highway or a motorway. They could decide.
The app itself it builds up this world representation with all these roads,
not based on any kind of map initially. That was all based on the activity of
the users. And I think that's mind blowing. How cool is that? It took them
many years to get it to a level where there was enough data for actually
people to like to ... for it to be massively adopted, but now it's a very
successful app, is one of the most successful map applications in the world,
and all started with a black screen, blank black screen and just collecting
data, machine learning, algorithms, analyzing it, and deciding what's a oneway street, what's a two-way street, it's a highway, what's a turn, what's a
bicycle way I guess. I'm not that familiar. I don't use that app much myself,
so I'm not sure the complexity is, but I'm pretty confident that has got some
very, very complex algorithms in the background.
Another one that we probably all know as well is Spotify and how it thinks,
it goes, analyzes your music consumption to give you suggestions, so the
recommender engine. That goes for recommender engines on Amazon,
recommender engines on Netflix and all these other platforms as well.
Those are really cool to think about, like how did it know that I would like
this music. If you think about it, 10 years ago, that would've been insane to
tell somebody that an app can predict what kind of music you're going to
like, even though, you've never heard that music before. I think that's pretty
cool.
Okay, so we're getting close. Third last one, which I really like, an app that I
enjoy a lot is called Foursquare. Foursquare, if you're using Foursquare,
you're probably smiling now because it saved me plenty of time, like at least
a couple of dozen times. It's an app that allows you to find places to eat,
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

and if you're traveling to a new city or even in your own city, if you haven't
used it yet, highly recommend checking it out.
You open it up and you say you want dinner or lunch, you want Indian, you
want vegan, you want, I don't know, a steakhouse, and you put that in the
search and then it will pop up a map showing you how users of the app
have already rated the restaurants around your place. Every single time like
if you find a restaurant that's eight stars or above, or especially if you find
something like a nine stars or 8.9, once I think I saw a 9.2 restaurant, you
have to go there. That means all these people, you can see how many
ratings, but usually if it's at least 100, it means there's at least 100 people
have been there and how that's how they rated it.
The power of the crowd is always much more powerful or much stronger
than just one expert or a couple of experts saying, "This is a good
restaurant." When you have 100 or a 1000 people saying it's a great
restaurant, you got to go there. Every single time because as you guys
probably know I'm vegan, so when I go to a new place I just type in vegan
and brings up all these places that are vegan or serve vegan options and
then I pick the one with the best stars and usually like 99% of the time it's
a very good guess. They have a lot of users, very powerful platform. I think
we already talked on the podcast about how they use their foot traffic data
to like one time they predicted how the annual statements of Chipotle will
... what will they come out as even before the annual statements came out.
It's a long story. You can check it out. There's an article I think on Medium
about that, Foursquare and Chipotle, but other than that, great app, uses
of course data science quite extensively, so another thing to think about
when you're using it.
Finally, my two top two apps that really blow my mind. As I said, they're
quite simple ones, nothing sophisticated, not like a Tesla car, but really,
really cool to watch them at work. Number two, or second top one is
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

Scannable. Scannable is an app by Evernote. So if you don't use notebooks
by Evernote highly recommend those as well. You can replace all your
notebooks and all your notes with Evernote and take really cool ... just keep
a lot of notes in one place, and it's very, very powerful, but then you can
download Scannable as well, and instead of using a scanner to scan
documents, you use Scannable and it's actually better.
There's lots of apps or you can take photos with your phone or there's other
apps that you can take a picture, and it will recognize it as a document and
save it as a PDF, but Scannable is by far the best one I've ever seen and the
way it uses, I think it uses deep learning. I'm not sure. It might be some
kind of machine learning or something like that, but to me it looks like deep
learning, but it's just mesmerizing. When you put it, like put your phone
over a page, even before you finish bringing your phone over, it's already
taken a photo. This is blue screen that adapts to the size of the page. If you
guys have a chance to check it out, you will really feel the power of these
technologies in this simple application. Once again, it's called Scannable.
Finally, one of my favorite ones is Vivino. I was recommended this app by a
friend and colleague and is if you drink wine, then this is a lifesaver app
because you can go to a store and you can take a photo of a bottle, of a
label of a bottle of wine, and just like with Foursquare you will get a rating,
well, how have people rated it before, how have people who've drank this
wine, how do they rate it. You'll see if it's like a three star wine, a two star
wine, a four star wine, whatever it is, and then you decide whether you
want to buy or not. Amazing. It's really cool to see it in action.
I especially like the feature when you can set it to not scan one bottle but
scan multiple bottles, and you just go through the whole rack taking photos
one after the other like in a row, like continuously, and as you're doing it,
it's analyzing those photos in the cloud and popping up ratings right on
your screen, so you can see like 4.3, 3.1, 3.9, 2.1, 4.4, and so on. Just as
http://www.superdatascience.com/206

you go and then when you see like acceptable rating like a 4 or 4.5 stars or
4.3 stars for a wine, then you can just stop. It's really cool, also
mesmerizing too [inaudible 00:13:53] in action. So even if you're not a wine
drinker and you want to see some cool, I guess, and once again, I think
that's deep learning in action, then highly recommend checking out Vivino.
There we go. Those are some apps that can get you inspired, and I'm sure
you've been already using quite a few of them already, but it's like it's about
changing the perspective. I've said this on the podcast before, a really cool
quote from my coach and it's, "When we change the way we look at things,
the things we look at change." We've been using these apps, but now if you
change the way look at them, the perspective you have, what you think
about when you use them, then all of a sudden you'll be looking at different
things, all of a sudden you'll broaden your horizons, you'll find more
opportunities for your education, for the application of the knowledge that
you already have in the space of deep learning, AI, machine learning, and
data science.
On that note, thank you so much for being here today, and I can't wait to
see you next time. Until then, happy analyzing.

http://www.superdatascience.com/206

