SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 170
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
A BUMPY RIDE

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/170

1

Hello and welcome back to the Super Data Science podcast. This is five
minute Friday and today the topic is a bumpy ride.
Just recently, I was flying on a plane from one island on the [commerce
00:00:16] to another and it was one of those tiny little things with a lot of
people jam packed into it. By the way, if you're watching this in video
version on YouTube, we're going to throw in some clips from this
experience, so you can get a feel for what it's like getting onto that plane
and lifting off, and flying, what the scenery is like and just get a feeling of
what it's like to be in one of those things.
The thing is, it's a tiny little plane. It's very quick because the distance isn't
that far. It takes off, around 15 minutes later, it already lands, and it's just
how people get around there so getting from one island to the other ...
There's four islands in total. Very commonly they use planes for that.
The thing is, while it's very exciting and the scenery's great, it's a really fun
ride, at the same time, because it's a small plane, it experiences quite a bit
of turbulence so it is kind of like a real life rollercoaster, and that ties in
quite well with today's topic which is a bumpy ride.
I decrypt this topic, lets talk a bit about what we've already mentioned
before and that is the importance of mentorship. We've had ... I made a
Friday episode about mentors and you have actually met two of my mentors
already, so you've met Richard Hopkins. He was on one of the earlier
episodes of this podcast, and he was also [inaudible 00:01:28] last year and
you have also met with Vitaly Dolgov who was on one of the more recent
episodes of the show and will be coming to Data Science Go this year, so
you'll get to meet him in person there.
Those are my mentors but in addition to mentors, sometimes you can also
have coaches. So what is a coach? A coach is a person like a mentor but
you pay for their advice. You pay for their tips and guidance. I also have a
coach. I just started this engagement. I started having a coach like a year
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/170

2

ago. I wasn't happy with the program so I stopped that, and now I restarted
it again with a new coach about a couple months ago, and I'm very happy
with the advice, tips and guidance that he's providing me. We meet up for
about 30 minutes, several times a month and all these tips are very, very
valuable and help me direct whether it's my business, personal life,
professional, other areas of life, in the right direction.
Why am I bringing this up? First of all, I wanted to share what coaching is
all about and that it is quite important. It's another way of getting guidance
like in sports you can have a coach. Why not have one in life? The other
thing is that content for this [inaudible 00:02:50] or the idea behind this
episode actually comes from my coach, and we were discussing once, like a
few weeks ago, the how to plan your days and weeks, and specifically
talking about setting goals for a day, and setting goals for a week, and my
philosophy has always been that alright, so if I set my goals for every single
day of the coming week ... Let's say it's Sunday. I set my goals for every
single day. Now I don't do that all too often, but when I really want to plan
out my week, I will set my goals for every single day of the week, and I
thought, okay. If every single days going to be successful, then by
definition, my week is going to be successful.
But he challenged me on that and said, "Hey. What about if one of your
days is not successful? For instance, Tuesday is not a successful day. It's a
bad day because you were stuck in a traffic jam, you had a cold, or you
couldn't get to things you wanted to because something else was more
important or got in the way, what happens then?" Well, when you think
about what happens then, that throws your whole day off. You're upset at
the end of the day, or you're not feeling as accomplished at the end of the
day and that might give you a bad mood the next day, and also those things
that you planned for Tuesday might be important, probably are very
important, and they're going to trickle into Wednesday but you already have
your own goals for Wednesday and that's going to compound and you might
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/170

3

even have a bad Wednesday because of that, and then it's going to
compound into Thursday and so on.
So that can be a risky situation, and so that is where he said, it's actually
more important to set your goals for the week first and then set your daily
goals. Why is that? Well, because that way, you see the bigger picture. You
see what's, lets say, top three things you want to accomplish by the end of
the week and then you can slot them into different days, you can add other
things, but you'll have the bigger picture in mind so in some places, you
might leave buffer, so you know where things might go wrong, or you might
just not jam pack too many things, that way if things just fly over into a
new day or you have to reshuffle them, you will have that availability. You
will have that time to accommodate.
Also, if something goes wrong in a day ... And this is the key. What he said
is that, if something goes wrong in a day, you still know that you can
accomplish it, you can catch up on the following day or you have three
more days to catch up on that and overall the week is going to be great, and
so, and this is the key, what he said, from all this, is that you can have a
bad day, but you can't have a bad week.
I know in theory, that's not true. You probably can have a whole bad week
but it's much, much harder to have a bad week, than a bad day. So let's
rephrase that. You can have a bad day, but it's very unlikely that you're
going to have a bad week, and if you keep that in mind, then all of sudden,
things change. Right? Rather than be stressed about not getting things
done in any given single day, you know that you have a whole week to get
things done and it is very unlikely that you're going to be stuck in a traffic
jam five days in a row. If that's the case, then maybe, it's time to look into
how you get to work and back, or the specific timeline of your days, but it's
unlikely that things will come up that will disrupt your schedule every
single day, and that way, you know that you, even though if one day it goes
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/170

4

off a bit, you're not going to be upset, and it's not going to throw away your
whole week because you know you'll be able to get up to speed with that.
So that's my tip from my coach for you today. When you're planning out
your next week this weekend, or maybe you do that on a Monday, when
you're planning out your next week, think of that. So rather than planning
out every single day, if you have that habit, try to think, alright. What am I
going to accomplish this week? What are the top three things that I'm going
to accomplish by the end of the week and once you have those, then, dive
deeper and put them into every single day when you're going to work on
each one of those.
Hopefully that's going to help you out and I can't wait to see you back here
next time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/170

5

