SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 152
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
DATASCIENCEGO
2018

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

1

This is FiveMinuteFriday episode number 152, DataScienceGO 2018.
Welcome back to the SuperDataScience podcast, ladies and gentlemen,
and, today, I've got an exciting announcement for all of us.
The DataScienceGO Super Early Bird Tickets are on sale. If you've been
waiting around for them, this is your time to act. In fact, today is the last
that you can get them. They've been on sale for a few days now or a week,
and you may have seen some emails floating around, some announcements
on LinkedIn, Facebook, some ads. It's happening. It's happening now, and if
you wanted to get a ticket, then this is the time you can get one.
In this podcast, I wanted to just talk about DataScienceGO a little bit and
tell you what happened last year and what we are up to this year, so, for
those of you who don't know, let's start there, if you haven't heard of
DataScienceGO before, DataScienceGO is an event that we came up with.
For a couple of years, we were doing courses and line and we've built up a
community. Right now, we have, what is it, almost 500,000 students
worldwide, which is very, very exciting, and then, at some point, [Hadelin
00:01:21] and I felt that we're not really getting to meet any of you in
person, that there's so much more that we can experience for ourselves and
help our students experience, and so we decided to come up with an event.
It took us quite a while to figure out a name, and there were a couple of
suggestions, and DataScienceGO was the winning option, and, yeah, so, in
October last year, we held our very first live conference. It was a lot of work,
a lot of preparation. We were preparing for it for six months, and even six
months ... This is a whole new world for me. I never knew what it would be
like to prepare a live event for 150 people. That's exactly how many people
attended DataScienceGO last year, a 150, and I never knew how much
work it would be and what it would involve, and so even six months of
preparation was barely enough.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

2

It was barely enough to make everything happen and book the hotel, book
the company that's going to be doing audio visuals and the flare effect, book
the speakers, get a motivational speaker on board and all sorts of these
things, but, nevertheless, we pulled it off, and thank you, a huge thank you
to the SuperDataScience and DataScienceGO team. It was really an
amazing event, amazing experience.
I'll tell you why I feel it was amazing and why I ... what our purpose is and
mission with this event, and so the idea for the event originally came to
Hadelin and I when we were attending a conference ourselves back I May
last year, and while it was a great conference, at the same time, it was on
data science, of course, but at the same time, we felt that something was
missing. We felt that it was nice. There was a technical knowledge. A lot of
people were talking about their advancements in deep learning or even
explaining deep learning in a basic level or machine learning and other
things, other topics as well, but it really felt that it was a bit dry and it was
lacking some energy to it, some passion, some empowerment. Like we
walked away with a lot of knowledge, but we didn't feel that much more
empowered and that much more energized.
At the same time, it so happened that last year I also attended, also in May,
what a coincidence, I also attended the Tony Robbins' Date With Destiny
event, and, there, I walked away super empowered, super energized,
powerful. I felt like I could change the world. I was completely different
person, and so we thought about it and we decided to combine the two. We
decided to take data science and to take energy, power, passion, fulfillment
and put them together, and that's what DataScienceGO is all about.
It's a completely different experience. It's not just one of those conferences
where you go to network, yes, and get some technical knowledge, yes, but
it's much more than that. In addition to networking and getting technical
knowledge, our focus is to empower people, to help you feel alive again, to
help you feel that you have the power not only to change, not only to learn
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

3

something new, but to change your whole life, to feel, to build a life and a
career where you feel fulfilled every single day, where you're doing what you
love, where you're having a fun and great time and you're empowering
others around you, and you're like one of those people that walk into a
room and everybody feels your energy, everybody feels your passion.
It's totally achievable. I've been through this myself. We all have ups and
downs, but through the right guidance and through the right people around
you, you can totally achieve a whole new state in your life, and that's what
we set out to create with DataScienceGO, and that's why in DataScienceGO
2018 we actually invited a lot of data science speakers. True, we invited
Ben Taylor, but we asked Ben Taylor not to just talk about deep learning
and the things that he's so passionate about like the new NVIDIA GPU
that's come out or training, retraining one of his models. We asked him to
talk about careers, and that's also a topic that he's very, very well-versed
on.
We invited some professionals in the space of machine learning and, of
course, data science to also talk about the technical topics, but we also
invited a motivational speaker. In fact, we had Kyle Cease last year. He's a
famous comedian, and he's also been in a few movies, and we actually
invited him to inspire people, and he has no relation whatsoever to data
science, but he got a standing ovation, and people were actually crying and
laughing during his presentation because he got through to everybody, got
through to our hearts and made us really melt in our chairs and realize
what our lives are all about and where we're going, and so that was very
exciting.
We invited a recruiter to talk about how you can build your career, how you
can position yourself whether internally within your company or if you're
looking for a job externally. We invited some people, some students with
success stories, so students who have taken our courses and who have
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

4

built a career from zero to hero and who have completely changed the
trajectory of their own lives and are feeling much happier and more excited.
All in all, it was a great mix of different speakers and people were not
knowing what to expect next throughout the two days, and so that's what
we're going to be replicating this year and, in fact, we're actually going to
double down on that.
Last year, we had a 150 people attend, and, this year, we want 400 people
to attend, so we can see how much impact we made last time and we really
want to help as many people as we can, to connect to as many people as we
can, so it's again going to be in San Diego. If you're interested, it's October
12th, 13th, 14th, so we get together on the Friday. We have a social night
on Friday, then, Saturday, it's the full day, morning session, lunch
networking, afternoon session, evening networking, and then, Sunday, half
day, up until lunch and I think a little bit past lunch.
We're inviting lots of speakers. Again, Ben Taylor's going to be there.
Hadelin is going to be there. We're inviting Rico Meinl who's flying in from
Germany, Neelabh Pant who's flying in from Texas, Nadieh Bremer who's
flying in from Amsterdam, and a couple of others that we're still getting
everything sorted. It's quite a while away, so this time we've started
preparing a whole year in advance, and we had to book the hotel and get
everything on board, and so this time we're much more prepared for it.
Last time, what I noticed was a lot of people came there and had their
company pay for them, so, if you don't have the means or you would prefer
not to pay for it yourself, then maybe you could check with your manager
because they can maybe cover your flights, accommodation and tickets.
Maybe they can cover some of that.
In fact, during the registration process, you'll see that we've put out a letter
there, which you can download and send to your manager and check with
them if they want to, if they'd like to sponsor you, because, ultimately,
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

5

everybody wants the best data scientist on board and everybody wants to
work with happy people, so why wouldn't your company invest into your
personal and professional growth? That's just something I had wanted to
tell you guys about.
Yeah, so we're preparing for a massive event. I totally understand if you're
not in there yet. Like if you're in San Diego, I'll be surprised if you don't
come because I would personally really go out to meet you. If you're in the
US, then I can understand it might be hard, but just bear in mind that last
time we actually had somebody who was flying in from Brazil on a 25-hour
flight. Somebody came in all the way from Czech Republic on a 24-hour
flight, and Rico came in all the way from Germany. These are just students.
These are not speakers. These are students who came from all over the
world just to attend this event.
Yeah, if you can make it, I'd love to network, connect with you in person
and shake your hand and give you hug probably towards the end. I think
it's going to be a really fun time. We're putting in a lot of effort to make this
event special and unique just for you, and I can guarantee, if you do come,
you will walk away a different person and you'll have a much clearer and
much more exciting, I guess, path ahead of you that you'll be looking
forward to every single day.
On that note, thank you so much for listening to this. Whether or not you
can come or not, I really appreciate you as a student. If you are interested,
the tickets are ... the Super Early Bird Tickets are on sale. This is the last
day they're available, and you can find them at www.datasciencego.com. I
look forward to seeing you in San Diego.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/152

6

