SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 144
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
TWO THINGS TO
REMEMBER AND TWO
THINGS TO FORGET

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/144

1

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 144, two things to remember
and two things to forget.
Welcome back to the Super Data Science podcast, and today I've got a
concept, a phrase that really resonated with me, and I would like to share it
with you. So, I was listening to a different podcast, I was listening to Lewis
Howe School of Greatness podcast, episode number 608. If you haven't
heard Lewis Howes podcast School of Greatness, I highly recommend check
it out, you can start off at this episode, 608.
It's with Jay Shetty. Jay is a guy from London who went and lived as a
monk in India for three years, and then came back, and now he's teaching
people the things that he learned. Mostly through videos, so you may have
seen his videos on Facebook or YouTube, they go viral, they get like 50
million views. So you may have actually already seen a couple of his lessons
that he's shared.
And in this podcast, there's lots and lots of valuable things that they
discussed, and lots of valuable knowledge that he shared, especially
wisdom from his time as being a monk. But one thing that really resonated
with me, and I remember I was walking onto the tarmac, off the plane onto
the tarmac, and for me, when something resonates with me, when it really
sticks in my mind, I can remember the location where I was, it's just how
my brain works. And I can clearly remember that I was getting off the
plane, and walking onto the tarmac to get to the bus that takes you away
from the plane.
And I heard him say this, so here we go. What Jay said, and what he
learned, one of the things he learned as a monk is two things to remember
and two things to forget. So let's go through this, the two things to
remembers are always remember the bad you've done to others, and the
good others have done to you. So, again, always remember the bad you've
done to others, and the good others have done to you.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/144

2

And he explains it this way, that by remembering the bad you've done to
others, you will always feel grounded and humble, and you'll never let your
ego get over you. So as soon as you start thinking how amazing I am, or
how great I am, and how I'm achieving success, or I'm doing so many great
things, all it takes is to remember what bad things, what have you done
that's bad, and you've done it to others in your past. When you were
younger, or years ago, or months ago. And we all have moments we're not
proud of, we all have moment which we might even be embarrassed by.
And so keeping those in your memory actually helps you to control your
ego, to always realize that we're all not perfect, that we all make mistakes.
That we all need to work on ourselves constantly to become better and
better, there's no stopping with that. And it really keeps our ego under
control, or helps keep your ego under control.
And the other one is to remember the good things that others have done to
you, and by remembering the good things others have done to you, you're
always going to feel grateful. So those are the two things to remember.
Now, the two things to forget, forget the good things you've done to others,
and forget the bad things others have done to you. So again, forget the good
things you've done to others, and forget the bad things others have done to
you. And the reason for that is if you don't forget, like if you keep thinking
about the good things that you've done to others, then you will get fixated
on that for too long, and again, your ego is going to grow from that. So if
you just keep remembering how you helped that old lady cross the street, or
how you donated $200 to charity, or whatever it was, if you just keep
remembering that all the time and fixating on that, that's just going to
perpetuate that feeling, and it's going to enable your ego to keep growing all
the time, and you don't want that.
So, once you've done a good thing, there's no need to constantly be proud of
it and remember it all the time. It's okay to forget that. And forget the bad
things others have done to you. Why should you forget that? Well, he also
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/144

3

explains it in a way that you don't have to necessarily become their best
friend after that, but the reason for that is that if you keep thinking about
the bad things others have done to you, and you fixate on that, you're just
going to drain your energy forever. You're not going to be able to look
forward, not going to be able to live life in the present, and move on with
your life, you're just going to constantly lose energy because of something
that happened in your past. And sometimes it's necessary to forget those
things.
So there we go, that's two things to remember and two things to forget.
Always remember the bad things, the bad you've done to others and the
good others have done to you. And forget the good things you've done to
others and the bad things others have done to you.
Something to ponder on this weekend, once again, it's from the Lewis
Howes podcast, episode 608, make sure to check it out if you're interested
to learn more of Jay Shetty's teachings and wisdom. And I hope you have a
fantastic weekend ahead and you've got some plans, or even if you don't, I
hope you have a quiet one, and have some rest.
I look forward to seeing you back here next time, until then, happy
analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/144

4

