	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 28
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
PRIDE AND
HUMILITY

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/28

1

	  

Kirill:

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 28, Pride and
Humility.
So I'm reading this book now, it's called "Ego is the Enemy",
by Ryan Holiday. And if you're looking for a new book to
read, then I highly recommend this one and you'll find out
just now from this one example from the book. And there it
talks about pride, and how when we do work, when we
create something or accomplish something in our careers or
at work or in our lives, we are often proud of our
accomplishments. And when you think about it, there's
nothing wrong with being proud about something that you
accomplish. Not even just boasting about it, but just being
inside yourself, internally, being proud about it. And that's
what I always thought, that hey look, if I've done something,
if I've created something, if I've completed some work, or
some project, I have the right to be proud about it, I have the
right to feel good about it.
But what Ryan Holiday says in his book is, he says that,
very interestingly, pride can actually cloud your mind. It can
put this haze over your mind, and I love this quote from the
book, where he says that "pride takes a minor
accomplishment and makes it feel like a major one." So how
deep is that thought? That you've created something, or
you've completed a project at work. And because you get into
this spiral of being proud of yourself, or of feeling good about
what you've accomplished, and you constantly think about
it, that oh yes, I completed this project, it's such a great
accomplishment, great feat. It starts to feel that it's this
huge world-changing thing that you've accomplished.
But at the same time, what he's saying is not that it's not a
major thing in the grand scheme of things. Maybe it is. It

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/28

2

	  

might be a huge thing. You might have helped somebody
out, you might have helped a whole community of people
out. But what he's saying is that this is a minor
accomplishment in the grand scheme of things that you can
accomplish. That you have the power to accomplish. And by
thinking constantly of how great you did yesterday, or
whether it was a week ago, or a month ago, you are
constantly delaying your next project. You're delaying
moving on to the next big thing that you can accomplish.
And the longer you feel proud about your previous
accomplishment, the further away will your next
accomplishment be.
And when you think about it, it's a very interesting concept.
And it's actually -- I find it very true, that sometimes when
for instance I've created a course, or I created a video
explaining something about data science, and I feel proud
about it, and I constantly think oh wow, I wonder how much
feedback I got for this video today, and what people said
about it, or how many views it got, and so on. But that is
taking up my mental energy, which I could be using to do
something better.
So if you agree with me on this, then I challenge you to test
this out next week. So probably you're going to have
hopefully a nice and relaxing and fun weekend, and then
when you get back to work and back to whatever you're
doing and however you're contributing to society, I challenge
you to look back at your most recent accomplishment and
instead of being proud of it, just acknowledge that you did a
great job, you've done something fantastic, you've maybe
created something, or you've helped somebody out, and
leave it at that. And then just move on to your next project.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/28

3

	  

And try not to think about your accomplishment that has
just occurred. See if that will free up your mind for new,
even greater things.
And I hope you enjoyed today's episode. I really appreciate
you coming on to the show and listening and supporting us.
This is what drives us forward. And hopefully I'm able to
share some valuable insights with you. If you're listening to
the podcast for the first time, then make sure to subscribe.
Because I can't wait to see you next time. And until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/28

4

