	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 18
WITH
JEN UNDERWOOD

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

1

	  

Kirill:

This is episode number 18, with Analytics Industry Expert
Jen Underwood.
(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Happy new year everybody and welcome to 2017! Isn't this
the most exciting year ever? We've got so much going on, the
world is dynamically moving into the space of data, digital,
data-driven technologies, and it's just so exciting. I can't
wait to see what will happen this year in all those spaces.
And moreover, on that note, we've got a super special guest
today. Jen Underwood is an industry expert in the space of
analytics. She has over 20 years of experience, and what we
talked about today is specifically that. We talked about the
trends in technology and data for 2017. So Jen, as she says,
constantly keeps a pulse on the analytics industry and is up
to date with all of the technology trends of everything that's
going on. And moreover, she's got a consulting business in
the space, she does all sorts of different work around
analytics and data science, she's also got a blog on data
science. So this is a person that is definitely on the cutting
edge of technology.
So in this podcast, you'll find out quite a lot. We talked
about six megatrends that are currently happening in the
space of technology, and at first you'll get an overview of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

2

	  

what they are, and then we will dive deep into each one of
them and I'm sure you will pick up a lot of new and valuable
insights. Personally, I learned so much from this podcast. So
I'm super excited and can't wait for you to listen to this
session. Without further ado, I bring to you Jen Underwood,
Analytics Industry Expert.
(background music plays)
Hello everybody, and welcome to the SuperDataScience
podcast. Today with me on the show, I've got a very special
guest, Jen Underwood, who is an Analytics Expert with
years of experience. Hi Jen, how are you going today?
Jen:

I am doing great.

Kirill:

So tell us a little bit where you're calling from.

Jen:

I am calling from hot Tampa, Florida, in the United States.

Kirill:

Yeah, it's still very hot? We talked before about this.

Jen:

It is! And it's supposedly winter, but I think it was -- and I
don't know the Celsius conversion off the top of my head -but 85 Fahrenheit.

Kirill:

Wow, that's -- I don't know the conversion as well, but that
sounds pretty hot. So yeah. It's funny, because I was in the
US earlier this year, and even not remembering the
conversion, you like switch over to Fahrenheit there, and
then you're like, ok, that's hot, or that's a bit cold, but yeah,
85 sounds pretty hot.

Jen:

It is hot, yeah.

Kirill:

Alright, so it's great to have you on the show, and just for
our listeners, could you tell us a little bit about what you
do?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

3

	  

Jen:

Oh, ok, great. So I've been in the industry a little over 20
years, it's going to be 21 years this coming May, when I
graduated.

Kirill:

Congratulations, that's a huge number.

Jen:

You know, it is. And essentially, a lot of it's driven by
passion. I knew I loved data, and it's taken me into different
directions that I really enjoyed. So I started off
implementing, meaning building, data solutions. Did that for
about 15 years, and then I moved into more of designing
solutions. So I designed solutions on the product team at
Microsoft, but also helped them go to market from the
technology, speaking technically to buyers. And now I'm
what's considered an industry analyst, and I also do some
market research, and I still have that creative spirit in me,
so I'm doing some marketing as well. I always play with
data, so the market research, as soon as I get the data and
I'm crunching it, but essentially it's been a really different
and unique path, but yeah, almost 21 years of this
craziness! Yeah!

Kirill:

That's crazy, yeah. And right now, your LinkedIn is very
impressive. You've been in so many different companies, so
many different roles, and all sides of analytics! It feels like
you’ve covered everything. And right now you have your own
company. Is that right?

Jen:

Yes. And the beginning of my career wasn’t planned at all to
move around much, but my husband was in the military
and we were forced to move every 18 months. I felt like I was
a permanent temporary employee. And at the time I
remember thinking, “Oh, this is really scary and challenging
and I’m always interviewing,” but then at the end of the day,
it really allowed me to have many different experiences, and

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

4

	  

see all sorts of different ways that people structured their
architectures or their reporting systems and play with
different tools along the way. So from an ADD perspective –
Attention Deficit Disorder, which I probably do have but I
just joke about it – I like to learn so much that I think it was
really a neat lifestyle.
And now I have my own company, I don’t think I will ever go
back. I like to set my own direction and pick and choose per
se the types of things that I want to work on, and I go after
it. So instead of when you’re consulting and you get
assigned a project or maybe you’re stuck in the same thing
for a long, long time, now it’s like “Nope, I don’t want that
situation. What is it that I really want to do?” and then I’m
going to hunt down some group that does that and see if
they’ll let me work on that.
Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. So your company is like a consulting firm for
analytics. Is that correct?

Jen:

Well, it’s interesting. It’s a mix. I would say it’s mostly
market and product research at this time, where I’m helping
vendors design products, understand the market. I do a lot
of hands-on testing of these tools, which is really fun, and
saying “I like these features. I don’t like these features. It’s
missing these things that I would really need as somebody
that loves data,” or I’d say “This is really not the flow of how
I’d be looking at it. I really need to have the script at this
point, or the output at this point, looking this particular
way.” And that’s been really fun. I also help people write
content and communicate effectively with other people that
love data, because a lot of times when you look at some of
the content that’s coming your way, it’s just fluff, or it’s
meaningless and it’s just not effectively communicating with

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

5

	  

you. And I’ve really been enjoying that aspect as well. So it’s
a mix of product and market research, and also a little bit of
writing.
Kirill:

Okay, yeah. And you have a personal blog as well, where I
notice you have lots of very interesting posts on the subject.

Jen:

That is my passion project. I don’t think people realize how
much time that crazy blog takes. I would say easily each
post is probably a full day. They usually start around 11:00
p.m. or midnight, and then 4:00 or 5:00 in the morning I’ll
finish up. And I always think “Oh, it’s just going to take 2
hours,” and then it always takes about 6 or 7 hours to really
create a good post. But for me, that’s my creative outlet, or
that’s my creative spirit, that gets to shine. Because a lot of
times in projects you may not have that ability to be creative
or to get that side of the project. So it is my hobby.

Kirill:

Yeah, I understand. It’s completely up to you, right, what
you choose to write about, what you want to cover off in the
next topic and so on?

Jen:

Yes. And call things out in the industry. I think the biggest
thing that I’m seeing right now is the media is a bit corrupt.
I’m going to be open with saying that. They’re telling one side
of the story on a lot of different things. The vendors certainly
aren’t going to tell you everything that you need to know to
evaluate solutions. So a lot of times, I’ll elevate topics that I
think are really important for folks to realize. They may not
realize it because they don’t have the technical background.
Or just topics that are fascinating. A lot of times I’m
predicting trends, so I see different trends in the industry.
My most popular blog this year was “BI Wars”. It was a “Star
Wars” themed—again, really creative, different --you’re
probably not going to see that in any normal tech journal!

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

6

	  

But it was real stats, it was real information, and I’ll be
darned if a month later, some of what I said came true,
which has been really interesting. I didn’t think it would
happen that fast. It’s also an outlet for me to call out
vendors or to just keep the world honest with data.
Kirill:

Yeah, that’s totally great, and I’ll definitely check out that
“BI Wars”. That sounds like fun. And I’m glad you mentioned
that you’re excited about predicting the trends, because that
is exactly the reason why I reached out to you to invite you
on this podcast. I would like to talk about the industry
trends. Or actually, to be fair, I knew there was lots of stuff
you could talk about, but during our conversation via email, you mentioned that this is something that you’re very
passionate about, and I’m super excited to talk about the
trends, especially leading into 2017. This year is kicking off,
and we want to know what’s happening, what’s going to be
happening in the world of tech, and the world of data, in
2017, so I’d love to start that conversation. Could you maybe
outline for us the main industry trends, and then we’ll dive
deeper into each one of them?

Jen:

Okay, so there’s a few that are what I would call
“megatrends”. You’ll hear a lot about this. And the core
theme around them is this concept of digital business
transformation, and digital business transformation
incorporates a few different types of movements that you’re
seeing.
The cloud and the whole concept of cloud computing has
really proved to be very compelling, and we are finally seeing
the fears of trusting the cloud, moving to the cloud. The laws
in different areas of the world are changing. The government,
different types of agencies that historically prevented sharing

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

7

	  

of data and whatnot – all of these are contributing to a bit
more cloud adoption. So we’re seeing that shift happen a
little bit more quickly now. Amazon just had their big event
and shared where those were. Gartner had an event this
year and shared how far. And it was fascinating to me, in
Gartner’s presentation, that 49%, almost half of CRMs were
in the cloud. I went “Wow! That’s a lot.” So that’s one of the
big pieces.
The other thing we’re seeing is intelligent analytics and
that’s fantastic for this audience and myself included, and
that’s taking things like the whole concepts of cognitive
analytics, artificial intelligence, deep learning, predictive
analytics, and prescriptive analytics that for years, I was
hoping folks would get there. That’s finally starting to
become key as data is seen as digital gold, and it’s the data
and the information that you can extract out of data that’s
really the game changer in this. Where everybody is pretty
much equal in this cloud world, that’s really the
differentiating—you know, analytics being at the core of that
transformation. And when we do these, or when I give some
of these sessions live, I show a video of the computer and it’s
a robot that’s so humanistic that if she didn’t have this little
patch showing it was a computer – her name is Sophia – it’s
scary how realistic the machines are becoming. I’m not a scifi movie watcher, but honestly, I feel like we’re a few years
away from the sci-fi world of “Is that a human or is that a
computer?” Because on the phone, you can’t tell if it were
Sophia answering the phone. And these chatbots that you’re
working with, the Watson chatbots and whatnot, they’re so
realistic and you wouldn’t know. So that’s really getting to be
quite interesting.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

8

	  

We have what’s called the Internet of Things finally taking
explosion. There has been a very interesting research around
things will certainly be more than people in this world, and
in fact they are already. So it’s these smart things and all
the digital signals that they’re sending, and this whole
Internet of Things becoming its own kind of entity and
creature to navigate in what I would call—there’s this other
piece of physical and virtual world, and that’s the area that
I’m honestly most excited about, and it’s more just because I
think—that thing was really called “third world”? What was
that world, that there’s another like alternate world, or
something? And folks would tool around and they would
have other identities and whatnot. In this physical and
virtual world, this is where you’re taking augmented reality
and virtual reality, and you’re able to see and experience as
if you’re right there.
And even with data I’m seeing it, being able to immerse
yourself and dive into charts, look at them in all different
directions and experience it. There’s a bit of simulator
sickness that you experience when you start to experience
data this way, or even some of the other types of virtual
reality viewers. But it’s fascinating to see maybe different
types of applications of these technologies from health care
to helping people simulate real world situations to even just
experiencing. I have a friend that’s disabled, and I showed
her the Google Cardboard glasses with virtual reality and the
Discovery Channel, and being able to experience going
through a jungle that she never would have the opportunity
to do otherwise. And jumping around and looking 360, it’s
really cool. So those are what I would call the top trends.
And we can certainly dig down deeper into lots of the other
little ones that might be easier for folks to grasp.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

9

	  

Kirill:

Thank you very much. That’s a great overview. Yeah, I’d
definitely like to talk more about just that example of the
virtual reality that you just mentioned. I totally agree on
that. I myself just tried out the HTC Vive recently, and it
feels so real. You’re climbing Mt. Everest, or you’re shooting
a crossbow, or a bow and arrow. It’s insane how realistic it
feels.

Jen:

Yeah, it’s really cool. We just went—and I’ve had the Google
one for a while, it’s very low cost. We bought the Oculus Rift,
I believe is what it’s called. It was on sale, so we got that. It’s
just a whole new way to experience watching and just
interacting with entertainment that I’m certainly not used to
because I’m not a gamer. Oh, that’s actually a good point. So
gaming and this gaming industry is really influencing tech.
And that is kind of fun and cool, but it’s also—you know, it’s
just getting really interesting.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. But it doesn’t always have to be gaming, right?
With those virtual reality tools, for instance, with HTC Vive,
you can just switch on your desktop and actually create a
virtual workspace and work on your actual projects but in a
virtual workspace. How crazy is that?

Jen:

Oh, that’s neat. Yeah. So one of the solutions that I was
looking at earlier this year, I think it was called Datascape.
They’re based out of London. And there are certainly other
ones coming for the data analytics space, of being able to
analyse your data in virtual reality. So, that’s been a really
fascinating area that I’ve been looking at. But yeah,
definitely not gaming. Where I’m seeing the most potential
adoption, or we’re seeing it already, is early retail, new retail
experiences being able to experience the product in 3D or
imagine yourself in this cool car. Yeah, that industry is

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

10

	  

certainly jumping on it, but we’ve also seen—my sister is in
healthcare, and she’s been doing what she calls sims, or
simulators, for a long, long time. Certainly IBM Watson is
kind of dominating that space right now. But all these
different applications of training folks to getting a chance to
see and experience, to entertain, and just looking at things
from a whole new perspective of reinventing.
Kirill:

Yeah, totally. There’s massive opportunities for application of
these things. Okay, so just to sum up your trends, and then
we’ll go into them, so our listeners can follow along, we’ve
got digital business transformation, we’ve got cloud
computing, intelligent analytics, smart machines, Internet of
Things and physical plus virtual world. By the way, if
anybody listening to this is not in their car, because a lot of
our listeners listen to our podcast on their way to work, you
can google and look for Jen’s presentations on SlideShare
and maybe as we go through these, you’ll be able to get
some additional information from the slides that you’ll find.
All right, digital business transformation – could you tell us
a bit more about that? What does that mean? What does
that imply?

Jen:

So the digital business transformation, and I have a session
on this specific one – I have a blog jenunderwood.com and
events – there’s a recording as well and there’s also a blog
that details what digital business transformation means,
because it seems really generic when you listen to it. But
when I start to dig into it I think it will begin to make sense.
A great example, and a lot of times I like to use examples, is
if you think about Uber in the concept of sharing resources
that already exist, or some of these new business models
that are very different than historical business models, but

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

11

	  

they’re relying on technology at the core and just changing
the way that the customer experiences the solution or the
provider. In this case it’s signing up to get a cab – in this
case it’s an Uber. All sorts of different approaches to it. So
it’s reinventing a business to a digital model and looking at
what we would call “the customer journey”, and the
customer journey being, you know, historically maybe you
would go on a website and order a cab; or you might call a
cab from a phone number, and then there’s a certain queue
of cars that would be available, and they’d send it out, and
tickets and orders. Well, Uber completely reinvented that
and said, “Well, just through this little app on your phone,
wherever you’re at, we can then send it to folks that will be
nearby. All these cars are idle. You don’t have to then
purchase.” I think in New York City I’d heard the last rate for
being a cabbie was something like $500,000. That’s like
buying a home. So it’s a mortgage to be able to be a taxi
driver. Being an Uber driver, you just get to download the
app—I think you apply, go through a background check, and
you’re good to go. I mean, it’s really removing that barrier to
entry, using technology to more effectively reach that
audience and just altering the system. But the key is what
we’re seeing happen in that space, is that whole concept of
looking at the customer journey, what pieces can be digitized
and automated or changed to be more flexible and leverage
some of the assets that we already have? Those are some of
the commonalities.
Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. So take businesses or ways of doing things
that existed previously and are not really aligned with where
the world is going, and change them to get them up to
speed. A great example with Uber. Same thing with Airbnb –
don’t build hotels, use existing assets.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

12

	  

Jen:

Yeah, exactly. Amazon is disrupting retail.

Kirill:

Totally. We can keep going, right? Facebook doesn’t produce
any content, but it’s the biggest content marketing platform
in the world and so on. Alibaba also changes the way that
you can start a business and take an idea from inception to
actually bringing products to your customers very quickly.
Yeah, that’s definitely something that we’ve been seeing. So
you think this trend will just become even stronger in 2017?

Jen:

I do.

Kirill:

Okay, beautiful. All right, so we should look out for more
companies like that. And if anybody has ideas for companies
and how to change things, it’s definitely worth looking into.
Next one was cloud computing, and you mentioned an
interesting statistic that 49% of CRMs are already in the
cloud. That’s a huge number. That’s like half of customer
relationship management systems. Is that across all of the
ones that exist in the world, or is that across a sample of
some certain industry that you’re looking at?

Jen:

So, in I believe it was October or November—no, it was
October – of this year, Gartner has an annual conference
with the C-level executives in Orlando, Florida. And this year
they talked about the stats on the Gartner audience and
most of the Gartner surveys and audience and customers –
those are large corporations. I would say you are not going
to see a lot of the smaller ones. So when you talk about
what’s the sample survey that they used, it’s their
customers. And here are some stats from that, because I
thought it was really interesting. The 2016 annual spend –
and I do have a blog on this, by the way, it was October
19th, that’s when it was – 49% of the sales in CRM were

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

13

	  

already in the cloud. The next biggest one was marketing at
27%, some digital commerce, which makes sense. What isn’t
quite in the cloud yet are things like manufacturing
operations, so those are still computers probably in a
warehouse somewhere. And what’s kind of in-between both
of those at 20% is HR systems and procurement systems.
Kirill:

Okay, a very interesting stat. So slowly we are seeing things
moving to the cloud. And by “cloud,” we obviously mean just
“off premises”. We mean data storage, like whether it’s on—
for example, if somebody’s using Dropbox, that’s an example
of your data being on the cloud. It’s not on your personal
computer, you don’t carry it around with you all the time.
It’s in the cloud and you can access it from other different
locations. So just to kind of sum up for our listeners, what
would you say are some of the advantages and
disadvantages of the cloud? Like, why is it taking so long to
take off?

Jen:

This is really interesting, and I have some recent experiences
with this. The benefits of cloud are the ability to rapidly
deploy innovation—so even historically, when I was a
product manager at Microsoft, in the past it would be every
5 years we might release an update, or then it became every
3 years. Then we were really excited and it would be one
year. And the solution there was a cloud-based solution
from Microsoft that I was on the product team for last year.
We were releasing almost once a day.

Kirill:

No way.

Jen:

And Amazon said the same thing. They were having over a
thousand releases in 350—how many days of the year are
there?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

14

	  

Kirill:

365 days.

Jen:

Yeah, exactly. So it’s more than one per day! And I thought,
“This is just staggering!” It’s so compelling. And the other
thing that was really interesting, and we’ve certainly seen it,
and what cloud allows you to do is what Salesforce did to
Siebel. So Siebel was on PRIM. They were the leaders in
CRM. And this is for older folks. Older folks may get this but
the younger ones may not. But basically Siebel was the CRM
system and the one, the leader. Well, Salesforce came in the
cloud, and they innovated very, very quickly and far
surpassed them. So when you think about some of the ease
– so some of the benefits as the speed of innovation, and I’ve
personally experienced it – and now when people come to me
and they have only on PRIM, I warn them that they can
easily very, very quickly get surpassed from an innovative
standpoint if they don’t have a cloud-based solution. I was
anti-cloud maybe 2-3 years ago until I experienced it myself.

Kirill:

Oh, really?

Jen:

Yeah, and the reason why—there’s an important reason
why, and Gartner confirmed this as well. It’s very hard to
estimate the challenge of cost, you know, how much is this
really going to cost me? And Gartner confirmed that really
it’s very, very difficult, and there’s a lot of surprise bills that
people are not prepared for. And when I think about, “Boy, it
was just nice to buy this packaged software,” and the
customers that I would work with, they would have a
database maybe for 10-12 years where like, “Oh, gosh, you
really need to upgrade every once in a while.” But hey, it
works. We don’t need to fix it. So this model of constantly
paying—you’re paying a lot more for cloud, you really are. So
the downfall is certainly that.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

15

	  

And right now what I’m seeing, at least in some of the early
adopters of cloud, is these shocking bills. There’s a customer
in Tampa, I can’t say who they are. They just laid off 40
people because they had a $2 million over [indecipherable
27:16] bill that they weren’t expecting. And I’m like “Oh, my
gosh!” You really need to be prepared and proactively very,
very closely monitor your cloud costs because it will alter
your business. And that’s what we’re seeing is folks having
to adjust their whole business model. We’re seeing
companies like ClickTech saying “We need to reinvent
ourselves for cloud now.” So they went from being a public
company to a private company to give them the chance to
restructure and reorganize their business. So there’s a
couple of downfalls you need to be ready for. The good part
is it’s easy and you get a lot of new features very quickly.
Kirill:

Yeah, and that’s some very interesting insights to the
company going from public to private just to get ready for
the cloud. And with your comment that it costs much more
to be on the cloud I will agree and disagree. On one hand, it
probably does when you go to something like Amazon, like
when they have this EC type of billing system, where they’re
just billing you per hour or per minute and so on. It can
really accumulate very quickly. And it is an expensive thing,
because you’re paying for a premium, for the service, the
security, the updates, that agility, the speed. It’s something
that they understand, these providers, that they can charge
for that premium.
But at the same time, imagine a huge company with 6,000
employees that has servers, and then all of a sudden they
need to upgrade. They have to spend like $20 million just to
upgrade the servers. It’s a one-off huge cost. Even though

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

16

	  

cloud might cost a lot over a long term, so every month
you’re paying huge bills, if you manage it properly and it’s
predictable, it’s manageable. But when you don’t have any
costs for 5 years and then you have to upgrade for $20
million, that’s a huge cost in one year, and that can really
sink companies sometimes.
Jen:

That’s interesting you say that, because I remember when
one of the cloud data warehouses came out. My peers in the
network that build a lot of data warehouses, they were
ecstatic, and the reason why is—and you see a lot of
excitement around these cloud data warehouses—well, one
of the reasons was because then they can take all the money
that you would spend in the hardware, and now put that
toward services. And that’s how my friends make a living, is
by selling their data warehouse building services, and
they’re like “Oh, we have more money to spend! So this is
great!” Yes, you absolutely have a point there, and it was
confirmed even by the reactions of my peers.

Kirill:

Yeah, all right. Well, thank you very much. That was a great
dive into cloud computing. Oh, I just wanted to mention this
very funny thing I learned recently about cloud. We
constantly think about cloud as this celestial thing, like “up
in the cloud”. But actually when you think about it, the
cloud – what is that – that’s just somewhere in a server,
somewhere far away, but how does information travel across
continents? It travels by cables—

Jen:

In the ocean.

Kirill:

In the ocean. So the cloud is under water, if you think about
it.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

17

	  

Jen:

Yes, it’s absolutely true. And some of the servers are in the
ocean to be cooled by the ocean, which is—I have some
mixed feelings on that because I’m an environment lover.
Yeah, I’m not sure if I love that or not, but yeah, there’s even
servers in the ocean too.

Kirill:

That’s great. Do you have a blog post about that?

Jen:

I don’t.

Kirill:

You should write a blog post about that! That is so fun.

Jen:

Yeah, that’s a fun concept to talk about, the cloud being
under the ocean. Because the ocean is very mysterious to – I
mean, even really, to the scientific community. They’re
constantly finding new creatures and new things in the
ocean.

Kirill:

One day they’ll find some servers there.

Jen:

It could be a fun theme. If I do, I’m going to definitely send
you that link.

Kirill:

Okay, sounds good. All right, moving on to the next one:
Intelligent Analytics. And here you mentioned that finally –
you’ve been hoping that the world moves to this for quite
some time now, and finally we’re moving to machine
learning, not necessarily artificial intelligence, that’s the next
one. So machine learning, different modelling techniques,
and really upskilling the way we use data, because data is
the digital gold of this era. What else can you add to that,
and where do you think this trend is going in the next year?
Or in 2017?

Jen:

So, the Intelligent Analytics is a fun area to see evolve.
Essentially we’re moving from the maturity level of analytics,
of historical reporting, and now we’re beginning to see more

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

18

	  

forecasting and predicting, but the technology again is
moving so fast that various vendors in the space are
automating the predictions, and going through all the
combinations of variables that historically someone might do
by hand, and look for the correlations, or they’d look for the
variables for data science, the most information gain, if that
means things to folks on the line. And looking for those
interesting patterns within the data, and transforming
variables to find what I would call the art and science of data
prep.
Well you have vendors right now that are automating those
processes and automatically creating predictive models and
showing you the results, and not just predictive but also
prescriptive, making recommendations of what to do based
on the scenario that you have. Now, these are things
historically—you know, you only had a few people maybe in
an organization, a large organization, that could do it, we’re
really talking about 1-2% of the population that’s able to do
prescriptive analytics, that even understands what
optimization and simulation even means. That’s a very rare
skillset to find. But we’re seeing some of that being
automated.
There’s a lot of scepticism that I have around that, and so do
some other folks. There is some good and some bad. The
good is that some of the dirty work is being automated, and
you’re getting some instant things. When you run some of
these automated insights, you’ll within a minute or two see
some of the things that may have taken you much longer to
find, if you were to find it. It’s unbiased, it’s going to run
across everything, so you may not realize that you have a
data science bias when you’re applying it, but
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

19

	  

subconsciously you might. So you’re removing the bias in
the analytics.
One of the fears that I have with this is it’s garbage
in/garbage out. A lot of times the predictive model needs to
really reflect the business process you’re trying to predict,
and you may not know all the variables in that process
where it’s very iterative in nature. And one of the examples I
had was for an insurance company. We’re trying to predict
churn of their reps that come in to sell because it’s very
expensive for this company to train them and then find out
they weren’t a good fit from the get-go. So what we were
doing was creating a model. The first iteration of the model
says “Don’t hire anyone from New York City.” That was the
output! So we take it as the techies to the business, and the
subject matter expert says, “Well, that makes sense. There
was a law that changed.” We went “Oh, we never thought to
include the regulatory laws for that in the model.” So it’s
things like that where I say, “You know what? I just don’t
think every single thing can get automated, and we do need
to be aware of the limitations of these tools.” But to a naïve
or an uneducated buyer, “Oh, I could see somebody that
really does data science. What’s taking you so long? What’s
the problem? I just saw them pick the easy button. You
should have an answer to me by now.” So I’m hoping that we
don’t have a bunch of bad decisions, and we don’t have
missed expectations or unrealistic expectations for folks that
really do the true art and science of data science.
Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. And I totally agree. Even though machine
learning and all these new modelling techniques are picking
up, there is still a gap that only humans for now can fill in,
where you’ve got to apply that domain knowledge, you’ve got

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

20

	  

to apply that creativity, you’ve got to do that. There’s some
research that you cannot get from the data. You go and sit
down with people working in the business and you find out
insights like this, you know, that there’s been a legislation
change and that’s something that’s not part of the input for
the machine learning algorithm, and therefore it’s only a
human that could have adjusted that. But with time,
probably 10 years down the track, machines will be doing
everything, I think, but for now—
Jen:

It is scary, yeah.

Kirill:

Yeah. For now, I totally agree that people should have
realistic expectations. That if they want a great model,
something that’s really working, it does take some time and
some creativity to come up with something like that. All
right, so that’s Intelligent Analytics.
And next one was Smart Machines. And here you talked
about robots and machines like, for example, IBM Watson
and so on, that sometimes you can’t even distinguish
whether it’s human or it’s a machine. So what is your
prediction for the space of robotics and robots and them
integrating with our roles? Do you think it’s going to start in
2017?

Jen:

Well, I think it’s already happened, and it’s happened in
different parts of the world faster than at least it has in the
United States. If I look at Asia and countries like Japan and
China, they’ve had robots already. We do see them in the
United States as well, in things like warehouses for picking
and bagging and tagging inventory type systems. But what
we’re seeing happen in Asia right now are robots that can
bring you food service when you order food service from a
hotel. When you come into a store, you can interact with

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

21

	  

them and ask them what is the type of—I think it was
Nescafe that was using this – again, retail getting creative
with experimenting early with technology.
And experimenting, by the way, is a theme that I’m seeing in
a lot of digital transformation, and a lot of playing with some
of these technologies to figure out what works and what
doesn’t, and the whole concept of “let’s experiment and fail
fast” and just try new and different things. It’s actually being
rewarded more so now where it used to—when I began my
career, you didn’t really want to take risks too often. A lot of
people were afraid to do that. And now risk-taking is almost
encouraged because we’re trying new things on the bleeding
edge. But going back to Nescafe, they experimented with I
think it was Pepper the Robot in different stores to help
consumers direct them to the coffee they might like. So
certainly we’re seeing a lot more of that. It’s the cost of
these, making these computers and these robots. In Silicon
Valley I’ve certainly seen a few running around in parking
lots, to try and share with people how far it’s come. But the
cost is still too prohibitive for it to get adopted widespread
right now. But I do see that we’ll see more, and probably
more from larger organizations.
Kirill:

All right. Yeah, I totally agree with that. Thank you so much
for the overview. And my natural question here is something
that I’ve also been pondering myself, is what will happen in
the world when these robots start replacing a lot of the
manual labour that we have. So when people start losing
jobs to robots – like even a coffeehouse is starting to use a
robot, or a hotel is starting to use a robot to deliver food and
room service, what will happen when mass population starts
losing jobs to robots? What is your prediction for that?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

22

	  

Jen:

Well, it’s certainly scary for the next generation. I have to say
I love to be positive about certain things, and in this case I
can say I’m uncomfortable with the answers in some of the
things that I see propaganda-wise in the media. So I’m
hearing a lot about universal base income that I never heard
about even 3 or 4 months ago really being pushed in the
media today as jobs are being offshored, or there’s different
types of trends with this automation. I think there will be a
lot less jobs. The estimates are there will be 60%
unemployment. And it’s being sold to the population right
now in the media as “Well, this is an opportunity to live
more and to enjoy yourself.” And it might be. You know, I’m
a workaholic and I don’t know what to do sometimes on my
time off but yes, I would love to do more with animals and
nature. You only live once, and certainly looking at a
computer screen every single day of your life is certainly not
healthy. So I think there is going to be a balance that yes,
we’re going to enjoy our lives more, so on the good part.
The bad part is our systems for mortgages and for loans and
for different types of things need to change with this and
need to adjust with these changes. The other thing then, I
think, is looking at different types of employment, so I think
what we’ll see is a renaissance of trades where it was the
Oxford Martin School – I believe they might be in England –
did a study on the probability of computerization and what
jobs would and would not be around. And the types of jobs
that would be around – they have an online calculator, it’s
quite fun – essentially, the types of jobs if you have to crawl
in small spaces, or interact and negotiate with people, if you
have to care for people, those types of jobs will be around.
The types of things that won’t be around are services jobs
that we’ve really—you know, we went from being

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

23

	  

manufacturing to service, so this is the fourth revolution,
the fourth industrial revolution, this whole digital
transformation.
The World Economic Forum is another really good site to
track what are the trends and what are policy makers
around the world doing about this problem to help with this
employment. Because now what we’re seeing is the services
jobs going away. What jobs are left? So health care, taking
care of people, negotiating… I think there’s going to be a
whole different type of job. And when I say a “renaissance of
trades”, you know, being able to build bridges might be
really cool again, or doing things that require that person to
be onsite and to deal with location issues because it’s hard
to get a computer in certain types of scenarios to crawl
under a house or to go into certain locations. Those types of
things may be new. So we’re really heading into a bit of an
unknown altogether really, all of us are.
Kirill:

Yeah, totally. Like you say, very scary and exciting at the
same time, so hopefully our policy makers and governments
can keep up with the technology and make sure that it’s for
the best of everybody at the end of the day.

Jen:

Well we are seeing already in the artificial intelligence space
the largest companies getting together and saying “We need
to have some ethics in data science.” And I believe that just
happened maybe a month or two ago. So we are seeing folks
certainly talking about these issues, which is good. At least
they’re not hiding from them. They’re addressing them,
they’re bringing it out into the open to have conversations.
It’s a matter of being aware of what’s happening. So you can
only plan so far in advance, but it is certainly something to

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

24

	  

be aware of. So if you’re going for a law degree or something,
the lawyer jobs may not be around so just be aware of that.
Kirill:

Okay. And can you elaborate a little bit more with this ethics
in data science, what did they talk about in that conference?

Jen:

So, essentially what’s happening right now is the concept of
— and you’re going to hear a lot about this as we talk about
trends and what you’re going to hear about in the next few
years. This has really started to surface with Salesforce,
Marc Benioff, being upset about the LinkedIn purchase by
Microsoft, and the control of the data because the data is
key. And that’s why you see all these apps for free. It’s the
data. So we’re going to see a lot more about “When you give
your data away, did you agree?” So, I certainly did not agree
to give my career information to whoever bought – it was
Microsoft in this case – I didn’t agree to do that, maybe I’m
uncomfortable with that. It’s, “What rights do you have with
the data itself?” Facebook has lots of controversial uses of
the data, as probably does Twitter and some of these other
accounts as well. So things on how are we using the data,
what rights are being given away, do you understand the
privacy laws? Is it being, I think, on the policy level — and I
felt this was really interesting recently: the White House in
the United States has a paper on bias in data science and
ethics in data science, and in their case they’re saying when
you look at setting credit scores or making loan approvals
and these types of things, making sure the data is not
biased towards one specific demographic or another one,
and making sure it’s really balanced and not skewed
essentially. So there’s a lot of different angles of it, but it’s
finally being discussed.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

25

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, very interesting questions are being raised. And it’s
totally a new space that’s emerging as a consequence of how
quickly and in which direction the world has been
developing in terms of data science, so it would be
interesting to hear more and see what comes out of those
conversations. All right, now we’ve got two more trends left,
so Internet of Things is our fifth trend. What is the Internet
of Things and what are your predictions for 2017?

Jen:

So when I think about the Internet of Things, I think about
all these little sensors that we have sending data, and it can
be something as simple as it would be a sensor on a package
that might be being shipped and you can tell immediately
where it is and where it’s at in the shipping process. It might
be a sensor on a vehicle saying that you’re speeding being
sent to your insurance company. It might be a machine
somewhere. I think one of the most fun gadgets is one of the
Amazon buttons that you can program yourself and just
click the button or you’re even [indecipherable 46:43] up
with voice, being able to talk and order things.
So you have things sending information for you, or finding
information for you. And the amount of data that things
generate is beyond exponential. It’s just ridiculously huge.
So there’s new architectures being designed that can just
ingest and handle, and a lot of times it’s very periodic heavy
loads. So think about maybe when you have a massive sale
on—in the United States, at least, it’s the day after
Thanksgiving we call it “Black Friday”. And then there’s
“Cyber Monday”. And there’s massive loads of folks grabbing
those great deal while they last. So your architecture needs
to be very flexible and just bring in data in its raw format
and just be able to ingest it. It’s called “ingestion.”

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

26

	  

And it’s a very different design pattern from when I started
in the industry and we would literally ask for requirements
and we would design how the data would come in. So we
might bring it in and store it somewhere, but then we would
be very picky about what we might take and pick out and
put into a data warehouse format to use. It’s very different
now, it’s just “get it all in there”. And then we have really
cool technologies. Amazon just announced Athena, that you
can just query the raw data in S3 as is, and schema-on-read
– just read it and query it and interact with it. No modelling,
no database. I’m like, “Holy smokes!” No ETL at all, no data
prep. I’m like, “Wow! This is crazy.” So it’s really getting
interesting, the design patterns. The design pattern changes,
just the way data moves changes and this concept of things
and being monitored everywhere is also quite interesting.
Kirill:

Yeah, totally. Okay, and you think that this trend will only
strengthen in the coming year? You said “beyond
exponential”, so we should expect even more data, even
more—what are the three V’s of big data? Velocity, variety
and volume, right? So you should expect that to just
increase in 2017.

Jen:

I do. And we’re seeing that, even with the consumer. I
literally have like a Raspberry Pi gadget in here, and you’ve
got people that are monitoring their garden. When they
travel—they’re travelling consultants that monitor their
garden with a Raspberry Pi. I always wanted one of those
easy buttons so I thought “Well, that’s neat. I just want to
play with it. I just want to be able to have my own button
where I push a button and all these cool things happen with
it.” So the technology is also being distributed to consumers
quite easily so it’s accessible.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

27

	  

Kirill:

All right, thank you for that, and we’ve got one more to go:
the physical plus virtual world and all this VR augmented
reality. Very exciting things! Where do you think that’s going
in 2017?

Jen:

So I see that first and foremost coming to a lot of folks when
Santa comes this year. I’m serious. So what I see is a lot
more folks playing, they get their viewers—the viewers are
less expensive. They used to be $600. We got ours this year
for $70. So it’s really very realistic with pricing now. The
Google Cardboard was $20. What I think is now we have
enough content in the library where you’ll see the
consumers this year enjoying it, playing it, looking for it –
we’ll probably see a lot more marketing at the retail, the
National Retail Federation. I would expect to see more
displays and more ways to attract from a marketing
perspective and awareness perspective these campaigns with
VR to experience their products in new and different ways.
I also expect health care analytics. And I was surprised – I
did some market research in this area recently – just how
pervasive it was in my particular network of analytics
professionals. And what we’ll see there is the ability to use
virtual technology in different industries like health care,
like working with neural electrical equipment or different
types of very difficult situations that you want to be able to
do. It’s called simulations today – to simulate that
environment. So I would expect to see much more there.
I’m not sure how much we’ll see in data. I certainly am very
optimistic that some of the solutions will come to play. What
I can see so far in the data visualization space is I’ve seen
some fun demos of experiencing the stock markets, and it
felt like you were on a rollercoaster literally. It was really

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

28

	  

neat and it’s fun, but it’s hard to synthesize because the
general user, or the general audience, is not used to
experiencing data by riding on a rollercoaster. And I looked
at another one. It was the Salesforce example with Oculus
Rift and I said “I don’t know what on Earth I’m looking at,
what’s good and what’s bad?” So there’s a lot of learning.
What I think we’ll see more of is, if anything,
experimentation, also folks learning how to design user
experiences so you don’t get sick, because we’re seeing that
happen already in the mainstream space, and we’ll just see
a lot of fun campaigns really this year.
Kirill:

Yeah, sounds exciting. And for those out there listening,
definitely pick up one of these devices, especially if they’re
now cost effective, you know, $20, $50, just like I do it
sometimes. Even though I don’t think I’m interested in
something, some piece of technology, if I can afford it, I will
still purchase it just because I want to experiment with it
and just to be on that technological trend, to know where
the world is going, because that might give me some ideas. I
might come up with a business idea or I might come up with
an application idea out of it. Like Jen said, experimentation
is an important part of innovation. And especially around
this festive season, why not pick up one of those devices and
see what ideas you can come up with.
All right, wonderful. Thank you very much for going through
all those six trends. I’m sure there was a lot of value. I
myself learned a lot from all of these examples and from all
your valuable experience and I’m sure our listeners will too.
Coming to the end of this podcast, I’d like to ask you to
share some ways our listeners can contact you and get in
touch with you and maybe follow you or maybe even connect

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

29

	  

with you over the different social media and different
resources that you have. What would you say are some of
the best ways to get in touch with you?
Jen:

Well, thanks for asking and thanks for having me on the
show today. The best way to contact me is I have a website,
jenunderwood.com. It’s my blog. There’s contact links on
that blog so that you can fill out a form and just reach out to
me. And I do get those and I usually answer fairly quickly
most of the inquiries that do come in. If you want to follow
me, I have a profile on LinkedIn. Google+ —I have a profile
there as well. And on Twitter. I’m very active on Twitter. My –
I guess you call it “tag name” or something – is @idigdata. So
it’s an easy one.

Kirill:

Gotcha. Yeah, I can attest to that. Jen is very active on
Twitter. Some very interesting insights being shared there,
so definitely, if anything, definitely follow Jen on Twitter,
@idigdata, and get the latest and greatest of the technology
updates. One more question I have for you today, Jen, is
what would you say is your one favourite book that you can
recommend to our listeners that will help them become
better data scientists?

Jen:

It is my all-time favourite. It’s an oldie but a goodie, is the
Dorian Pyle “Data Preparation for Data Mining” book.

Kirill:

And what do you like about the book?

Jen:

It really goes into what I would call the art and science of
preparing data, and that’s the magic sauce in a model, is
how you would transform the variables. You know,
sometimes even finding a pattern that wouldn’t even
necessarily—maybe it’s the null values or it’s the records
that weren’t filled out. That’s a variable. It helps you think

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

30

	  

about how to look at data a little bit differently for predictive
modelling in general. So it teaches you how to think and
approach data prep. Things like the skew and the bias I
talked about that you won’t realise maybe that you have in
your sampling techniques. It’s really a classic that’s taught
in most – or at least used to be taught – in the universities, I
don’t know if it still is, but it’s probably one of the best ones
that taught me just the magic and how important that piece
of the process is.
Kirill:

Fantastic! That’s some great advice, and I totally agree. Data
preparation and the way you think about your data, about
your data problem and about how you’re going to tackle it
are very important. So go ahead and check out that book:
“Data Preparation for Data Mining” by Dorian Pyle. Thank
you very much, Jen. It was a pleasure having you on the
podcast and I’m sure so many people are going to pick up so
many valuable insights from what you have shared today.

Jen:

Thank you for having me.
(background music plays)

Kirill:

So there you have it. How exciting was that! So many
different technological trends and each one of them has so
much substance to it. It was so interesting talking about
this with Jen. I definitely picked up so much from this
podcast myself. Probably the biggest insight for me was the
thing that we talked about in digital transformation when
Jen mentioned that it’s about reinventing businesses to a
digital model and she gave an example of Uber, we talked a
bit about Airbnb and all these businesses that are doing
same things that used to be done before, but they’re doing it
differently. They’re doing them digitally, they’re disrupting
their spaces. You know, I’ve always thought about these

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

31

	  

things and I’ve known—everybody knows about Uber and
Airbnb and all those companies and the way they operate,
but I’ve never thought of it that way, that they’re actually
doing something that used to be done a lot of the time
before. It’s something that’s been around for a very, very
long time, they just changed the way it’s done. They didn’t
invent something new to be done. You know, hotels have
been around for ages, and the taxi industry has been around
for ages as well. They’ve just invented a new approach to the
old problem. So it’s just a different way of thinking that I
think I’m going to be a bit more open to now, or I’m actually
going to encourage myself to think about things I see around
myself in that way. But at the same time, everything on this
podcast was super valuable, and I’m sure you’ve had lots of
different takeaways and I could probably make a huge list of
the things that I’m going to take away from this show.
I hope you enjoyed it, and if you did then you can find the
show notes at www.superdatascience.com/18 because this
was episode number 18, and there you’ll find the transcript
for the episode, any resources that we mentioned, including
a link to the book that Jen mentioned. Also you’ll find the
links to where you can contact Jen such as LinkedIn,
Twitter, her personal blog, her company website – there’s a
lot of links to remember here, so definitely check out that
page. And I highly recommend that you do follow Jen on
Twitter. Her handle is @idigdata. The insights that she’s
sharing are invaluable and they’re sometimes funny and
they’re sometimes exciting and they’re always about
technology, they always will help you keep up-to-date. And
on that note, thank you so much for joining us today. I look
forward to seeing you next time. Until then, happy
analyzing.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/18

32

