	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 26
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
SWEAT EVERY DAY

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/26

1

	  

Kirill:

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 26, Sweat Every
Day.
I've already mentioned previously on the podcast Lewis
Howes and his School of Greatness and his podcast. Well, I
was browsing around Lewis's website a couple of months ago
and I came across this very interesting notion which I
wanted to share with you today. So the notion is about
sweating every day. So basically, doing some form of exercise
to release sweat and to do that on a consistent basis,
practically daily. And why is that a good idea? Well the first
thing that came to my mind is because as data scientists
and analysts, we focus a lot on developing our brains, our
minds, our capacity to process data and think, and all these
skills on the computer, and we're constantly in front of our
monitors and even though we're developing that part of our
body very, very well, sometimes we may forget about the rest
of our body. And we might end up sitting in front of a
computer for days in a row and not really go outside, not
really go to the gym or do any sports, and it's very easy to
neglect and forget your body.
And so, while on one hand you might be advancing in your
career and achieving great results at work, at the same time,
your health is experiencing detriment. So a good way to keep
track of that is to every day, at the end of the day, ask
yourself, "Did I sweat today? Did I do something that made
me sweat?" And that way, it's a good rule of thumb that
"Yes, if I did, that means I'm not forgetting about my body.
And if I did forget to sweat, and I forgot to do some exercise,
then tomorrow I have to get onto it." And eventually with
time, you'll probably come to a routine where you will be

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/26

2

	  

sweating every day and doing something, and you'll actually
be enjoying it.
And this also led me to do some additional research, what
are the medical benefits of sweat? What are the actual
physiological benefits of sweating every day? Well, there's
actually so many benefits and good, positive side effects of
sweating. And here's a couple. For example, sweating
releases endorphins, which make pain go away. So if you
have some chronic pain, or you just hurt yourself
somewhere, or some kind of pain, sweating and exercise
might help with that because it releases endorphins.
Sweating also controls mood swings, and it helps your brain
to be happier. You know how before going to the gym you
might be cranky, and then afterwards, you're all pumped up
and you're all excited about life? That's exactly what's going
on.
Also, sweating fights kidney stones. So you know sometimes
when people might develop kidney stones? Well, sweating
means you're doing exercise, and it means you're drinking
more liquids, means that you're flushing your kidneys more
and that helps prevent kidney stones. Also, there's heaps
more benefits. For instance, sweat releases antimicrobial
peptides onto your skin and helps fight things like colds and
other infections, helps release pollutants and toxins out of
your body, and it also even helps heal wounds, there's
something to do with stem cells there, but I'm not a doctor,
I'm not going to go into detail on that.
But out of all of those, my favourite one is probably that
sweat helps regulate your body temperature. Meaning,
obviously when you're sweating and you're exercising, your
body temperature goes up, so if you're doing it at some time
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/26

3

	  

during the day or in the morning, you get pumped up for the
day and your body temperature goes up. But what that also
means, and this is something I learned from another
podcast, something else I was listening to, is that on the flip
side, 12 hours from there, when night time comes, your
body temperature will drop lower. So if during the day your
body temperature went up higher than normal, then during
the night it will drop lower than it normally does. And that is
the key to a good night's sleep. So if you don't exercise and
your body temperature is pretty consistent throughout the
day, then it doesn't drop that much during the night. But if
you make it, force it, to go up during the day through
exercise and sweating, then during the night it will drop
lower so it's like a sine wave, or a cosine wave, something
like that. It fluctuates up and down, and the volatility of that
fluctuation down is higher when the volatility of the
fluctuation up is higher. We're talking mathematical terms.
But basically, that means you'll sleep better. And if you
sleep better, you can work better, you can learn better, your
mind has a better rest.
So those are the benefits of sweating every day. I challenge
you to start thinking about that this weekend. At the end of
Saturday, look back and ask yourself, did you sweat? At the
end of Sunday, ask yourself the same thing, and maybe
you'll get into the habit of that and that might help you lead
a better and healthier lifestyle.
Thank you so much for being on this show. I love you so
much. Can't wait to see you next time. And until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/26

4

