	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 23
WITH
SAM FLEGAL

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

1

	  

Kirill:

This is episode number 23, with Marketing Expert Sam
Flegal.
(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Hello and welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. Today
we've got a very cool episode, and if you're in marketing, or
you deal with marketing data in any way, shape, or form,
then listen up, because you're in for a treat. Today we've got
Sam Flegal joining us, who is the marketing manager for
Ontraport. Now Ontraport is a company that provides
business automation software to small businesses and
entrepreneurs, and it's a huge company located in Santa
Barbara, California. And as you can imagine, they deal with
data all the time.
So Sam is in the space of marketing, and he actually
analyzes a lot of marketing data on a daily basis. And in this
podcast, we're going to talk about a lot of interesting
techniques that uses. So we'll talk about setting up data
points, we'll talk about cutting down your data instead of
analyzing everything and trying to boil the ocean. We'll talk
about how he manages a team of people working in the
space of analyzing data for marketing. We'll talk about how
he goes about reporting data, how he creates these cool
infographics to help management understand data much

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

2

	  

better, which I found really, really cool. And also, Sam will
share a lot of different hacks, tools, and tips that he uses.
Plus, Sam's been at Ontraport for many years now, and he
will tell us, he will reveal how his career progressed through
the years. So if you are looking for a career in marketing and
data, then this will be a very, very valuable discussion for
you as well.
So we've got a very dynamic podcast filled with value all
around coming up. And I can't wait for you to get started. So
without further ado, I bring to you Sam Flegal of Ontraport.
(background music plays)
Hello everybody, welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast.
Today with me on the show I have Sam Flegal, who is a
marketing expert at Ontraport. Sam, how are you today?
Sam:

I'm doing great. How are you?

Kirill:

I'm good as well, thank you. Where are you calling in from?

Sam:

I'm calling in from Santa Barbara, California.

Kirill:

Wow, that is far away! So for those of us who don't know, I'm
in Brisbane, Australia. I actually was in Santa Barbara
earlier this year, and it's a 12 hour flight to LA. So well away
from here. How is everything going there in Santa Barbara?

Sam:

You know, things are good. It's winter here, which means
that it's just barely not boiling hot all the time. So that's
kinda nice. I get to wear a sweater once in a while, you
know. Which is rare for me, but!

Kirill:

Yeah, yeah, I can imagine. And climate there is very, very
interesting. Well, I know about the -- when I was in Santa
Barbara, I liked the nature. So you've got the mountains on

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

3

	  

one side, and the beautiful ocean right there. So it's
something you don't even get in LA. But would you say the
climate is a bit softer than the rest of California?
Sam:

Oh, yeah. I mean, I’m complaining about it but the truth is
it’s like a perfect 72 degrees here all the time. Most people
love it. I just so happen to like colder weather so I don’t
really get a lot of that but, you know, that’s personal
preference.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. So just a quick brief description of how we
know each other for our listeners. Sam works for a company
called Ontraport, which is a fantastic company in the space
of business automation, so if there’s any entrepreneurs
listening out there, then definitely check them out. They
provide something much more powerful than just a way to
build your email list and maintain your email list. They
provide a whole database and lots of automation tools. I was
doing a lot of training with Ontraport this whole year. I was
in Santa Barbara like over four times. Throughout my
journey with Ontraport, I’ve met a lot of people that worked
there, fantastic people, and Sam is actually the marketing
manager. He uses a lot of data in his decision making, so
that’s what we’re going to be talking about today. So just
quickly to get us all up to speed, Sam, what exactly do you
do as a marketing manager at Ontraport?

Sam:

Yeah, so as a marketing manager here, what that essentially
means is I take credit for everything else my team does. I put
data into pretty graphs so that executives know why they’re
paying me. That’s essentially what I do. (Laughs) In more
serious terms, though, what I actually do is I manage a team
of about eight people, which make up our marketing team.
Together, we’re responsible for all of the marketing efforts of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

4

	  

the company. So that includes things like email marketing
funnels, advertising, e-book, you know, lead generation
stuff, and sort of everything in-between. We write all this
stuff, we publish all this stuff, and then me specifically—we
report on the stuff and prove whether or not it’s making us
money essentially. So that’s sort of what the team does and
then on an individual basis, I make sure everyone is aligned
around our goals, which is pretty easy to do because our
executives are pretty transparent about that, as I’m sure you
know because you’ve met Landon and Lena. So that’s one of
my jobs. And then I’m ultimately responsible for the
reporting side of everything. I take the results of all of our
campaigns; like I said, I put them into pretty graphs and I
then send them to Landon and Lena, our president and
CEO, to tell me whether or not we should keep doing them.
Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. Wow, it sounds like a very involved role. You
work on both sides. You’re working with a team of people,
putting it together, and talking to executives. So you’re kind
of like the bridge between the analytics and the findings and
the people that make business decisions. Would you agree
that that’s an accurate description?

Sam:

Yeah, I mean, I think that’s actually why I was put into this
role, is to be sort of that bridge between our executive team
and the marketing team, essentially. Back in the day when
we were a lot smaller, you know, I was actually the seventh
employee here at Ontraport. And when we were that small,
I’d talk to Landon, our CEO, every single day about what we
wanted to do and what was relevant at the time. But as
we’ve grown, you know, we’re like a hundred people now, not
everyone gets to have that voice from Landon and Lena
about where we’re going and what we’re doing. So that’s a

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

5

	  

big part of my job. But here at Ontraport, one of our
philosophies is that we do have working managers. What
essentially that means is I spend about half my time doing
the role of marketing and analytics and running data and all
that stuff, and half of my time managing people and helping
them in their careers and to be successful in their own jobs.
Kirill:

Wow, that’s very interesting. So yeah, I remember Lena
talking about that in one of our training sessions. Yeah, it
must be quite hard, because you have to spend at least
about a good hour per week with every one of the people
working on your team. What does that leave you? Like, four
full days of work that you can actually put in yourself.

Sam:

(Laughs) It’s actually a lot less than that. And I hope Lena
doesn’t listen to this, because she might construe this as me
complaining, but the truth is—like you alluded to there—we
do one-on-one meetings with all of our team members. So I
sit down with my ad buyer Ben, I sit down with my assistant
marketing manager Megan, one-on-one every single week.
Then they have a tool we use, 15Five—I know it’s data
science and analytics, but if anybody listening to this is
doing management stuff, check out 15Five. It’s an app that
allows people to fill out these like weekly reports that let
executives as well as managers know if they’re happy, what
roadblocks they have, things like that. So I also review all
those every week. We have manager meetings, we have peer
groups. I mean, there’s a ton of stuff that we do to help
nurture our people around here.
And to be completely honest with you, it’s probably the part
of my job that I take the most seriously. Which is odd,
considering I’m responsible for the growth of the company as
well, but I think that Landon and Lena would agree that

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

6

	  

nurturing our people to do their best work is more
important.
Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, I totally agree with that. Those listening out
there, in my view personally, Ontraport is the model as a
business to copy and model the way you actually run your
business. They’ve got everything down pat; you know, the
operation side of things, the way employees grow, the way
these 15Fives are implemented and even schedules,
employee schedules. Is it just in the engineering team, or is
it in your team as well, where you have like one hour per day
where there’s like absolute silence where nobody’s allowed
to—?

Sam:

That’s actually the whole company. Everywhere in the
company, except for our support team because they have to
be on the phones helping clients.

Kirill:

(Laughs) Naturally.

Sam:

But everywhere in the company, we actually have 3 hours a
day: we have an hour and a half in the morning and an hour
and a half in the afternoon where we have time set aside for
sort of like company improvement projects. So what we
found in our early days was that when you get bogged down
in sort of the day-to-day work—me, for example, as a
marketing guy and as an analytics guy, I could easily spend
all day every single day just running numbers on our
campaigns. You know, digesting that data, making strategic
pivots based on the data and letting the executives know
what’s going on.
But if I do that all day every day, then we don’t move forward
as a company. We don’t get projects done like introducing
new features or marketing a new—like, we released

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

7

	  

Ontrapages, which is like a little brother product to
Ontraport. And if we don’t make time for that kind of work,
then it doesn’t happen. So we actually set aside three hours
a day for every single employee to work on that kind of stuff.
Kirill:

Yeah, totally. And I know from my own experience that you
can get bogged down in this “business as usual” type of stuff
and completely forget about business growth. So it’s a very
innovative approach to telling everybody, “Hey, guys, we
can’t talk for three hours a day. Just get the work done.”
And it works, right? Ontraport is growing exponentially.

Sam:

Yeah, yeah. We’ve been very fortunate. But the timeblock—
we call it timeblock—but the timeblock schedule of those
hours with no communication, just work on these big
projects has been really great. Another thing that’s sort of a
hidden benefit, and I’m sorry, I know we’ve talked a lot
about management and operations, which is not the point
here—and you can edit all this out, if you want—but one of
the big benefits, one of the sort of hidden benefits of that
system is that you find opportunities to empower your
people to take on big projects as project leaders. So currently
my team has two big projects we’re working on, and one of
them is being led by one of our copywriters, and the other
one is being led by our assistant marketing manager. And
this is the first time for both of them leading a big wholeteam project. So it’s a great opportunity, a great learning
experience for them to take on these big projects and learn
project management and learn delegation and learn all of
these skills that they’re going to need in order to advance
their careers, whether it be here or anywhere else.

Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree. Alright, so thank you for that overview.
We’re going to now proceed to the data side of things to not

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

8

	  

disappoint our listeners. Alright, so tell us a little bit about
data in your role. How do you use data as the marketing
manager? Oh and the way I got to invite you on the podcast
was I talked to Rochelle, because she does a lot of the
product side of things, and I was asking her if maybe she
wanted to come on the podcast, maybe she knew somebody,
and she was like right away, “Sam is your man. You should
go talk to Sam. He’s the man to talk to about data.” So tell
us why everybody thinks you’re the person to talk to about
data at Ontraport.
Sam:

Why people think I’m the data guy?

Kirill:

Yeah.

Sam:

(Laughs) So I will tell you just sort of upfront here, my data
experience in my day-to-day work with data almost
exclusively occurs on the marketing side of our business.
The reason I say that is there’s obviously a huge amount of
value in data science and analytics on the user side of
things, like analysing how our customers are using our
application because we are a software company, and I don’t
have a lot of insight into that. So I’m just going to preface
this whole thing by saying that.
But for the marketing side of things, which is what I do do, it
kind of goes without saying, but the truth is if you don’t
know your numbers you don’t know anything when it comes
to marketing. If I’m spending $100 on a marketing campaign
and I don’t have any data on the backend of that campaign
on how well it performed—and mind you, I’m talking about
realistic data, not just like, “Oh, look it got this many clicks
on Facebook or whatever,” but real data to drive our
business forward—if I don’t know the results of that

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

9

	  

campaign, I have no idea if we should do it again, or if we
should turn that $100 into $200. And that’s the part that
I’m ultimately responsible for.
Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. That’s a good comment, that user data is not
what you work with. You’re specifically focused on the
marketing data. As I imagine, the way current modern
marketing works, you’d be like bombarded with data from all
over the place. Where are these data elements coming from
that you analyse?

Sam:

Yeah, so we have a bunch of different tools and sort of entry
ports for our data. I guess to say that I don’t run data on our
users is partially true and partially false. The reason I say
it’s partially true is because I don’t actually look at or use
data about our clients, about our Ontraport clients all that
often unless it’s presented to me and I’m asked to do
something with it. But I do do a lot of data on our leads and
on people who haven’t quite converted into a customer yet.
So we have a lead management tool called Ontraport. It’s
pretty awesome.

Kirill:

(Laughs) Fantastic! Love the plug. Yeah, awesome.

Sam:

(Laughs) Yeah, that’s where a lot of our data starts. So I
have a lot of data on our leads and our lead health and our
lead scoring and things like that. It all comes from our own
application. I mean, yeah, obviously I’m going to plug
Ontraport, but the truth is I’m sure that most entrepreneurs
and business owners listening to this podcast have some
tool that they’re using, whether it be CRM or autoresponders or whatever, that provides them that data. So
that’s a big chunk of data that I look out on a daily basis.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

10

	  

In addition to that, I would say that next largest section of
data that I look at is going to be from our advertising efforts.
We do a lot of advertising on things like Facebook, Google
AdWords, you know, re-targeting around the web. And I
have a lot of different dashboards and data points coming at
me from those platforms because really, that’s where we’re
actually putting the money on the line. So I spend a lot of
time with that data because I need to make sure that if I’m
going to spend $1,000 on this advertising campaign, that I’m
getting the backend that I need in order to justify that cost.
So I spend a lot of time with advertising data.
And finally, the last big one that I look at a lot is going to be
site engagement stuff. You know, this may be very basic for
your podcast, but I do spend a lot of time in Google Analytics
looking at how much time our people are spending on our
pages, what they’re clicking on. We do some heat-mapping,
you know, we look at that kind of stuff as well. So those are
some of the three big buckets that I spend most of my time
on.
Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. So then the natural question would be from
there, since you’ve got all these different sources of data—
you’ve got the Ontraport system, which is very cool that
Ontraport uses their own system in their business. That’s a
great way to lead by example. And then you’ve got Google
Analytics, you’ve got these heat maps, you’ve got all these
sources of data. So the natural question from there is, how
do you go about connecting this data? How do you go about
joining these different datasets, understanding how to
combine them into something that you can actually use?

Sam:

Yeah, so that is actually a great question because that was—
not to jump off track here for a second, but that was

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

11

	  

probably one of the biggest lessons I learned when I first got
the role that I have now. My first entry into marketing here
at Ontraport—because I wasn’t hired as a marketing guy, I
was hired in 2009 to be support rep. That was 7 years ago
now. So through the years I’ve grown into the marketing
team, but my first role on the marketing team was actually
data analyst. And if I’m going to be completely honest, the
first thing I did as the new data analyst for Ontraport was
Google “What does data analyst do?” (Laughs) “What do data
analysts do? What is data analysis?” Things like that, right?
So one of the things I learned very quickly, one of the biggest
challenges that I had to learn was how take all the data from
all of the different sources and put it into one place that’s
actually digestible, that’s actually usable. Because you’re
absolutely right when you sort of alluded to here that you
can get bogged down so easily and so quickly in
overanalysing one element of your data, and that’s a huge
mistake. Anyway, that’s sort of a preamble to set up that
what I’ve done is looked at things that our software can do
because we do have reporting metrics, obviously. Otherwise
we wouldn’t be a piece of software worth owning. So we use
our own software for as much as I can. Anything that I can’t
use my own software for, I find myself using something like
Wicked Reports, if you’re familiar with them. I use them for a
lot of our sort of first click engagement reporting metrics.
And what that does is it allows me to sort of take all those
data points—because we’re talking about hundreds and
hundreds of data points—and condense them down into
what actually matters and then get streamlined reporting
based on that. So Wicked Reports is a tool that we’ve just
begun using that we’re really happy with.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

12

	  

But even if you’re not interested in Wicked Reports, one
thing that we did very early on is we used UTM Variables,
which are Google’s proprietary sort of tracking variables, and
we slapped that on everything because what that allowed us
to do was follow our efforts from not just “Did they convert
on this ad or not?” but all the way through to “Did they ever
purchase something from us? If so, how long were they a
customer?” Things like that, right? Because that’s the data
you don’t really think about and that’s the data that really
matters. So what we would do is set ourselves up on the
frontend with Wicked Reports, with UTM Variables, to be
able to track that stuff all the way through. Then we created
dashboards and metrics that help us track that kind of data.
So to answer your question—I know I’m sort of like rambling
here—but to go back to the original question of like how do
you take all that data and turn it into something usable, the
answer is I got rid of most of it as quickly as humanly
possible because there was too much of it and I knew that if
I showed Landon or Lena like a hundred pieces of data at
the same time, it was not going to be useful. So the first
thing I did was ditch as much of it as I could based on my
actual objective.
Kirill:

Gotcha. Very interesting. So kind of like get rid of all the
stuff that you’re not going to be using and then start from a
fresh page. Okay. And I really liked your comments as well
about setting up these data points. So this is a very
important part that a lot of businesses miss. They try to
analyse data but they haven’t set themselves up for success.
They don’t have the right data points. And I hope that our
listeners will take this to heart. Like, you might have
inherently some data points that already exist. Like, you
might be measuring—alright, so you can tell how many

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

13

	  

people purchase because you can see how much money
came in. Or you can tell how many people visited your
website because you have Google Analytics telling you that.
But then to measure the journey of the customer through
your website, seeing where they actually go from page to
page, where they fall off, where they don’t click a button or
which buttons actually get more clicks than others and so
on. That doesn’t just come out of nowhere. You’ve got to set
yourself up for that. You’ve got to put those data points in
place. One of the examples that you mentioned—or two—
was UTM Variables, which is Google’s proprietary thing, and
Wicked Reports.
So tell us a bit more about Wicked Reports. Oh, by the way,
guys, everybody listening to this, Ontrapalooza – great
conference! I’m going to make this plug for you guys. Like, I
was at Ontrapalooza this year. It’s a marketing conference in
Santa Barbara. So if you live somewhere in California, it
should be a no-brainer to go to Ontrapalooza. It’s usually in
October. And it’s going to be the 6th one in 2017. If I flew in
for Ontrapalooza from Australia—literally, I was in Santa
Barbara for 4 days just for that and it was the best
conference I ever attended.
Sam:

Oh, thanks, man. That’s awesome.

Kirill:

And you did a lot of the organizing there, right?
Unfortunately I didn’t get to your presentations. There were
so many people presenting at the same time. But yeah, the
organization of that event was just incredible and the guest
speakers that you had were also fantastic. And one of them
was, I think, the founder of Wicked Reports. Is that right?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

14

	  

Sam:

Yeah. I’m not sure if he was the founder or one of the
founders or whatever his role was, but he’s a higher-up over
there at Wicked Reports, yeah.

Kirill:

Yeah. Again, I didn’t make it to that presentation. I was
listening to Basic Bananas presenting on the customer
journey or something. (Laughs) But what would you say
about Wicked Reports? Like you said, you just started using
it. And how does it compare to Google Analytics?

Sam:

Yeah, you know, the simple—and I’m sure that if Andy—we
talk to a guy over there named Andy. If he listens to this,
he’ll probably want to slap me for missing huge selling
points on the software. But the truth is for us it was actually
a very simple choice to start checking them out because
UTM Variables, if you’re not familiar—just a real quick
summary of what they are—essentially what they are are
variables that you add onto the end of a URL, and that
information is then scraped by your whatever form of
technology you’re using. Again, we’re using Ontraport. It will
scrape that information and pop it into the contact record of
the person who opted it. And what that does is it allows us
to sort of track, “Okay, cool, so we know they came from this
particular ad and this particular campaign,” and then we
can tell if they purchased and stuff like that, which I was
talking about earlier.
What Wicked Reports does is a little different. It allows us to
not only track where they came from the first time because—
and I should go back and mention, UTM Variables, I don’t
know about everyone’s software, but for Ontraport it doesn’t
overwrite. So if they opt-in from one ad, for an e-book or
something like this, and they get all that data popped into
their contact record from the UTM Variables, if they click on

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

15

	  

another ad a week later and opt-in from something else, it
will not update those fields because UTM Variables are
supposed to be original source. So those fields are stuck.
But what that doesn’t tell me as the marketing guy is,
“Okay, cool, yeah, he downloaded our e-book on email
marketing or whatever. But then he downloaded an e-book
on landing page optimization and actually ended up buying
the next day from that.” And that’s a very interesting thing
to know. And Wicked Reports allows you to sort of take that
UTM Variable tracking because it’s very similar in the way it
works, but it allows you to check based on first click, so that
would be similar to UTM Variables, you know, the original
source, as well as the last click before conversion. So that
was a big selling point for us to check them out and try it
out.
Kirill:

Okay. Fantastic! That would be a real game changer to
actually see what indeed triggers the customers’ final
decision rather than what just brings them to your business.

Sam:

Yeah, and that’s what it’s all about. And I know that was
sort of a brief overview, but one of the areas that UTM
Variables kind of fails at is—okay, great, I have an
advertisement out there and I’m sure some of your
customers are probably in our advertising group so they may
have seen our ads for an e-book or whatever on an
entrepreneurial topic. So they click on that, they fill up a
form—great, that locks in to UTM Variables. I know that I
generated a lead from that campaign. That’s awesome.
The problem is now we’re going to start sending out emails.
We’re going to start nurturing them towards a purchase.
We’re going to start teaching them stuff, we’re going to start
pitching them stuff, whatever. And if they click on one of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

16

	  

those emails and make a purchase, UTM Variables aren’t
going to help me, right? Because sure, the UTM Variables
and that e-book is what got them into our funnel in the first
place, but which email in my funnel was the one that got
them to purchase? And that’s a different conversation, right?
And that’s something that Wicked Reports does really well.
Kirill:

Fantastic. And at this point, this is where I like to mention
that we’re not just talking about this as like evil marketers
sitting here wearing our evil hats. All of this creates for a
better customer experience as well, right?

Sam:

Of course.

Kirill:

On one hand you get to sell the product. But on the other
hand, if you know from which email the customer
purchased, like in this example, then you can follow up with
the right content and give them the best experience after
purchase. You know, that is what Ontraport, for example, is
all about. It’s not about just selling and that’s it. It’s about
having a great customer experience. You guys are going to
have like a customer success team or something like that,
right?

Sam:

Yeah. Yeah, we have a whole team of people dedicated to
helping new Ontraport customers sort of set up their
accounts and make sure that they’re good to go. Because
like you said, sure, I’m the marketing guy and my job is to
be harsh about data and tell Landon and Lena, “Hey, guys,
this ad works and we’re getting a ton of conversions,” which
is kind of the opposite of touchy-feely. That said, we have
tons of people here at Ontraport whose job it is to make
people feel great and to have a really good customer
experience and that’s the backend. You absolutely have to

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

17

	  

have that part. Because if all you’re worried about is
conversion rates on all your emails, then you’re going to end
up with emails that are spammy, and weird, and no one
likes them. And that’s where you end up in that sort of evil
marketing corner that you’re talking about.
Kirill:

Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So, we know where you get the data
from. We know how you go about putting it together. Alright,
now you have the data. What do you do with it?

Sam:

So what I do with it is a couple of things. The first thing I do
is I analyze the data for my own purposes. And what I mean
by that is the first thing I do with any set of data is I spend
some time looking at it and sort of reflecting on it. I use my
own brain and my own knowledge of what we’re trying to
accomplish and I determine, based on my opinion, is this
successful or not, what could be better, where are we failing,
and things like that. And I do this with sort of raw data.
So I take all the data, I throw it into a big spreadsheet, or
whatever it is I’m looking at, and I start to analyse it myself.
I’m taking notes; I’m doing whatever I’ve got to do. Then
what I do once I sort of made my conclusion about it is I will
inform the team, sort of what’s going on and we’ll all look
over the numbers together so that we can pivot if we need to,
or we can take advantage of something that maybe they
didn’t find in their first impressions of the data. So if there’s
like some sort of a hidden gem like, “Oh, hey, guys, this is
working really well. Let’s focus on this,” that kind of stuff,
then finally I take that data and I turn it into something
digestible for people who aren’t on my team. So, one big
spreadsheet with like hundreds and hundreds of numbers
on it is not digestible. I know I’ve talked about it a couple of
times. I apologize.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

18

	  

Kirill:

(Laughs) Whoa! You got me scared for a second. I thought
you were going to say that’s what you create, that one big
spreadsheet.

Sam:

No, no, no, no. That’s what I start with. That’s what I like
but that’s my job, is to like that, right? (Laughs) But I take
that spreadsheet with the God-awful number of numbers on
it and actually one thing I do is I bought—there’s a web app
called Infogram. I think it’s like “Infogr.am.” It’s like 5 bucks
a month or something like that, but what it does is it allows
you to pop data in in like a spreadsheet format and then it
will make like infographics out of it. So I actually do that
with our data. I take the relevant numbers that I think prove
whatever point it is that I’m trying to make. I throw it into
something like that and then that’s what I send off to my
boss, to the president and the CEO, so that they know where
their business is headed. Now, if it was just me, I may not do
that because I don’t mind the big spreadsheets, but that’s
one thing that I do with it almost every time. So any time
there’s like a big funnel—actually, I may do it later today. Me
and Lena just tested a big funnel last week. I have all the
numbers, I’ve crunched all the numbers, I’ve looked at all
the data, I’m going to take the relevant information, put
them into one of those Infogram infographics, and that’s
what I’m going to bring to our meeting later to show her on a
screen.

Kirill:

Oh, fantastic! That’s a very efficient way of showing data.
Because a lot of the time, data scientists either present these
huge spreadsheets or they spend hours and hours and
hours trying to create a visualization or trying to come up
with a way to present this data. And you’ve just come up—or

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

19

	  

you’re using a very quick way. What was it, infogr.am? Is
that right?
Sam:

Yeah, I think it’s infogr.am. I’m pretty sure that’s the
website. But if you just google “infogram” you’ll find it. But
yeah, that was the thing. I did exactly what you’re talking
about. My first time showing data, you know, when I was the
data analyst googling how to do my job, I would show giant
spreadsheets. And very quickly, I would look around the
room, and I would notice that nobody was paying attention
20 minutes in. Because it’s just—it’s unbearable. If you
don’t know what you’re looking at, it’s not usable.
So then I tried making visualizations like you’re talking
about. I would spend a lot of time in Excel or Google sheets
trying to make these graphs and it was just taking way too
long. So my new problem was like, yeah, I was getting cool
visualization, but I was spending way too much time doing
it. So this thing, you know, it costs us almost nothing, and I
think they even have a free version. So if you don’t care
about their branding on your stuff or whatever, there is a
free version. So I think I even used the free version. But I
found that what I would do is they just have spreadsheets.
That’s where they get the data to present these graphs. So I
would just copy and paste entire sections of my
spreadsheets into this thing and it would spit out really
pretty visualizations that are interactive, you can mouse
over all the points to see the exact numbers and all that
kind of fancy stuff. And I just made it a lot easier on myself.

Kirill:

Wow, man, you just got me excited about that. I’m going to
check it out after this podcast. That’s fantastic.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

20

	  

Sam:

Yeah, you should. Honestly, I think it’s like $5 or $10 a
month but what it saves the company in my time is well
worth that amount of money.

Kirill:

Totally. And when you’re like presenting internally, within
the company, not like as a consultant to your client, but
internally, you don’t have to go that extra mile of making it
look absolutely fantastic. You just want efficient
presentation, right? Something that’s not raw numbers but
something that is very visual. And if it looks like the colours
are not ideal or the interactivity is not ideal or something
like that, nobody cares about that as long as you get the
point across, right?

Sam:

Right. And also, they all have the context. I think that’s one
thing for consultants, and if you do have any consultants
listening, I want to make it clear: I wouldn’t recommend
Infogram for like your next big presentation to a business.
(Laughs) You should absolutely do the homework and get
the really impressive presentations, spend the time. But like
you’re saying, for internal presentations, they know the
context. They know what the campaign was, they know what
we were trying to accomplish. They know what a CTR is.
They know what a CPC is. I don’t have to explain all of this
information on different slides or whatever. I just need to
show them the graph with the numbers on the graph that
tell them whether or not it’s working and that’s it. And the
fewer slides, the better. Really! Or the fewer infographics I
have to use, the better. Like I said, the first thing—and I’m
sure there are people who are much more educated in this
arena than I am listening who are probably very angry with
me—but the first thing that I do with any amount of data is I
get rid of as much of it as I possibly can. I have to find the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

21

	  

numbers that matter the most, what is our objective, are we
achieving that objective, and I work from there.
Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. That was a very good overview of presenting, of
actually being that bridge between the analytics and the
stakeholder. So I’m sure that a lot of our listeners will get
some takeaways from there. And the next thing I wanted to
talk to you about is like—rewind a little bit back. So you’re
doing the analytics. You’ve got the data, you’re doing the
analytics. But before you present, what techniques do you
use? What are the most common techniques you use in your
analytics when you’re working with marketing data?

Sam:

I’ll tell you the big one. The big one that I use, and this was
something that—again, I know I’ve said this a couple of
times but I want to make it very, very clear. I have no formal
education in this, so I learned a lot as I went. I was put into
a role that I was absolutely not qualified to do, and I sort of
learned along the way. And one of the big lessons I learned,
in addition to how people simplify data and all that stuff,
was this concept of statistical significance. And especially in
marketing, where you do a lot of testing and a lot of split
testing and A/B testing and multivariate testing and blahblah-blah-blah, it’s so, so, so important that you know
whether or not your results are statistically significant.
And what I mean by that is, if you’re not familiar with the
term, basically, very smart mathematicians out there in the
world have developed these equations that will tell you how
confident you can be in the results that you’re seeing, and
more importantly in the difference in those results. So let’s
take an example. Let’s say I have two ads running on the
same thing, and the only difference is the image on those
two ads. I’ve got a Version 1 and a Version 2. If I have a

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

22

	  

higher click-through rate on Version 1 than I have on
Version 2, initially your thought would be, “Great, Version 1
wins. Let’s kill Version 2 and keep moving forward with
Version 1.”
The problem is you can’t be sure on a smaller scale if that
will continue to be the case, that Version 1 will continue to
win. So let’s put some more context on that example. Let’s
say that those ads have only been shown to 200 people
each. Your likelihood of those numbers repeating and it not
being just chance is pretty low. So you have to know
whether or not you can move forward confidently knowing
that those results will hold. So that was a big one that I
learned very, very early on.
And then to answer your question more specifically, what
techniques and tools do I use, I use a calculator to tell me
whether or not my results are significant. I don’t present
anything to the executives or to even my team unless we
have significant results. Because what’s the point, right? If I
show the CEO—going back to our earlier example—if I show
him the results of Version 1 and Version 2, he’s probably
going to tell me to turn off Version 2 because Version 1 is
winning but boy, that could be wrong. They call that a false
positive. You have to make sure that your numbers are
correct. So the calculator that I use—I used ones that I just
found on Google or whatever for a long time, but the
challenge that I ran into with those was that they only
allowed, most of them at least – I know you said you found
one, before we started recording you were telling me about
one. I had never found one, but they only allowed you to
compare two things. So 1 vs. 2 or A vs. B.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

23

	  

The problem I was having was—like I said, a lot of what we
do with advertising and, you know—we’ll launch 25 ads just
to test, copy and image and whatever, but they all go to the
same place. So what I have do is very quickly run statistical
significance calculations on all 25 of those ads. And the
problem with the 1 to 2 comparison, because I’m sure some
of you are like, “Okay, just fill the thing out 10 times, 2 ads
at time. That’s 20 times. It’s not that big of a deal.” The
problem is what I didn’t realize—and again, I learned as I
went—but one thing that I learned very quickly is it’s not 1
to 2, 3 to 4, 5 to 6. It’s 1 to 2, 1 to 3, 1 to 4, 1 to 5 – all the
way through. And then 2 to 3, 2 to 4, 2 to 5. I mean, there’s
hundreds and hundreds of comparisons. And we used to do
it by hand and it took us hours and hours and hours.
So I put together a Google Doc, it’s called the Stat
Significance Calculator. And I basically just took the
formulas that I found online on how to generate these kinds
of numbers, slapped it into a spreadsheet, put some styling
on it and made is as simple as I could to save us time.
Before we started recording I gave you a link to it—I don’t
know where you’re going to put it—but you guys are
welcome to make copies of this. I made a copy of it, then I
made it public. So you guys can have this. Just go to the
link, copy it and then it’ll copy it to your Google Drive and
you can use it. But this thing saves me tons and tons and
tons of time every single day.
Kirill:

Yeah, thank you so much for that. Sam did share his tool
with us and we’re going to put it on the show notes so make
sure to check that out and download it. And if this is
something that Ontraport use in their business, and you
either have a business or you’re in marketing, then this is

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

24

	  

something you should be using as well. So thank you so
much for sharing that.
Sam:

No problem. And the one thing I will mention—sort of the
two things I will mention. The great thing about this
calculator is—and I want to make this very clear, I did not
invent Statistical Significance. I take no credit whatsoever. I
just found the equation online and put it into an easy-to-use
template. So, you know, all the credit goes to everyone else.
But anyway, one of the things that’s beautiful about this
calculator is it takes a lot of the emotion out of the equation,
so you no longer have to say, “Here are the results,” and
then have an argument about what they mean. This thing
will help you make your determination about what’s winning
and what’s not, emotions aside. The other thing I will
mention really quickly, because if you are familiar with this
concept, you’re probably familiar with the idea that you
should run on a confidence level of about 90-95% confidence
that your results will continue, you know, significance. We
believe that as well. That said, the calculator that I have
developed here is running on an 80% confidence, so if you
want to tweak that, you can dive into the formulas and find
how to up that. But it is running on 80% so just know that. I
feel like I should put a disclaimer on here. (Laughs)

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. And I’ll add a disclaimer as well. Our listeners,
if you guys decide to download this tool, then just know that
you’re doing it at your own risk. Ontraport do use this tool,
but Sam and Ontraport have no liability for this tool, so just
double-check everything that you’re using and make sure
you’re comfortable with this tool before you proceed to
actually base your business decisions on it.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

25

	  

Sam:

Yes, definitely do that. In fact, I would recommend just to
take that one step further. I would recommend that you do
this action manually a couple of times just to familiarize
yourself with how this even works and then start using an
automated tool like this. That’s sort of a philosophy we have
around here. Ironically, we’re an automation company, but
we always try to do something manually first and then we
automate it. So if something breaks or if you’re questioning
whether or not this thing is actually working, you can go
double-check your math and do it yourself. So I highly,
highly recommend that. And like you said, I take no
responsibility because this is way above my head. I’m not
even entirely sure how it works, to be completely honest with
you. (Laughs) I just know that that’s what I read so I threw it
in a doc.

Kirill:

Okay. Thank you so much. So that was a great overview of
statistical significance and I cannot stress enough how many
times, how often it happens that marketers, and even people
not in marketing, underestimate the importance of statistical
significance. Just imagine that like, pretty much all of the
drugs that you get from the pharmacy, they have undergone
tests. And all those tests—they’re like either A/B tests,
you’ve probably heard the terms “control group” and
“placebo effect”, where somebody gets a placebo pill and
somebody gets a normal pill. And all of that says, “Well,
guess what? Statistical significance is also used to prove
that drugs are working and things like that.” So it’s a very,
very important concept and Sam gave a very good outline of
what it is and how it works and why it’s important to run
those tests before you present your results. So I can’t add
anything to it except for just make sure to use statistical
significance and keep it in mind in your analytics. Moving on

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

26

	  

from techniques—we’ve talked about presenting, we’ve
talked about techniques, we’ve talked about the way you get
data, how you put it together.
The next thing I want to talk about is quite interesting
because you mentioned a couple of times that you don’t
have any formal education in this space. Actually, I’m going
to share a little surprise. You probably didn’t know this, I
found your video from Ontraport, the careers video. (Laughs)
Sam:

Oh God. (Laughs)

Kirill:

On YouTube. So if anybody wants to see Sam when he was a
bit younger, just go to YouTube and find that video. But
basically, there the main thing related to data that you
mention is that you type really fast, which is a great example
for a lot of our listeners. So the question is, how do you go
from not having any formal education in the space of data,
and just typing really fast, to being a marketing expert and
leading a team of eight people in data science presenting
business decisions or things that drive business decisions to
the president and the CEO of a company. What has been
your journey and what have been like the main points that
you can outline to us in that journey?

Sam:

Okay. Well, I guess to start, you know, I think it helps a lot
that I grew up with an interest in technology and software
and in this kind of stuff. To be completely honest with you,
my hobbies and my interests are all entirely nerdy. So I just
happen to enjoy this kind of work, which I think is a big part
of why I’m successful at it.
But as far as my journey goes, you know, like I mentioned
earlier, I was hired in 2009 as the seventh employee and I
was hired to be a support rep, so to answer the phones and

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

27

	  

help clients. And that was great because our business serves
businesses. Our clients are business owners, so when I was
helping clients, I was getting a really good indoctrination and
a really good education on how business is done in the real
world, how people are setting up their businesses, how
people are setting up their tools like Ontraport to automate
their businesses and run their businesses. So that was
really a great starting point, was just learning how business
is done, learning what lead magnets, learning what landing
pages are, learning what an email funnel is, things like that.
So I spent a couple of years learning that kind of stuff.
Then the next step for me here at Ontraport was I moved on
to our services team with Rochelle, who I know you’ve
mentioned you met, and me and Rochelle built our services
team. And what that was at the time was you could call in
and pay us and we would build stuff for you in your
Ontraport account to run your business. So that was great
because that gave me the opportunity to hear Rochelle
interact with people—who was much more knowledgeable at
the time than I was—about how marketing works and how
business works. So I was able to listen to her, get a good
education from her and then I would take people’s
businesses and their strategies and I would help them
implement them. So now I’ve got some general business
knowledge and some hands-on building systems and
processes knowledge, which was great.
From there, once we sort of built the services team out, I was
actually very fortunate and I was able to help—I don’t know
if I can say their names or not, so I’m just not going to—but
we had three or four big, big clients that needed help with
product launches. And they needed help with marketing and
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

28

	  

with actually carrying out their launch. Let me rephrase
that. They didn’t need help with marketing. These people are
obviously very successful. I know they know how to market.
But they needed my help with implementing their marketing
and the tracking, the reporting metrics on the Ontraport
side so that they can tell whether or not it was working.
And that was great. That was probably the best education I
got because I got to see how were the big boys doing
marketing, how were the big boys reporting on that
marketing. So I was actually a part of, a very integral part of,
multiple launches that did well over a million dollars in
sales. And that was great. That was probably the tipping
point for me.
After that, I was given the opportunity to help market our
own brand. So yeah, that’s sort of my journey, I guess. But it
was a little more than that. I spent a lot of time on nights
and weekends—especially after I got the first data analyst
job, like I said—I spent a lot of time on nights and weekends
reading blogs and googling and reading books and just
anything I could put my hands on to try to become educated
and it set myself up for success.
Because, you know, while we’re sitting here and we’re
talking about it on a podcast and it’s fun to pretend like I’m
the king of the mountain or whatever, and I know what I’m
doing, the truth is at the time I just wanted a successful
career. I just wanted to be successful in my own career
personally. I wanted to get promotions, I wanted to get raises
and I wanted to be valuable to the company so I applied my
learning to that field. You know, that’s what I did.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

29

	  

Kirill:

Yeah. That’s a great journey that you’ve had and learning
through experience, you’ve had some fantastic opportunities.
Also, it’s a big challenge to stand up to something that you
don’t know at all, especially like going into million dollar
projects or million dollar launches and assist with that.
That’s a big thing to do. And it’s great to hear that you went
through all of that and successfully came out on the other
side.

Sam:

Well, that is one thing. It’s a great opportunity. And again, I
don’t want to derail us and talk about people management,
but it just so happens to be something that I’m learning
myself, and I want to impart on your people because I’m
sure you have people who are business owners themselves
maybe looking to hire people. But the truth is, you know,
one of the biggest things I learned about being an effective
employee, and especially because I know I saw in your notes
before we hopped on the call here that it sounded like some
of the people who listen are looking to get careers going in
this field.

Kirill:

(Laughs) More like 80% of the people.

Sam:

Okay, great. That’s actually great, because I will tell you the
one bit of advice that I give to all of my people as I hire new
people and whatever is, “Never say no to a challenge.” And I
know that that sounds like something that you put on a
motivational poster and stick up on the calendar or whatever
but the truth is, one thing that led to my success in this
field and really all of my team’s success and anyone I know
who is successful is—you know, when we were a lot smaller,
Landon would come out of his office and he’d say, “Hey, I
need someone to do a project,” and my hand was always the
first one up. You have to learn by doing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

30

	  

Reading the books, reading the blog posts, listening to this
podcast – while it’s a great first step, it will not replace the
experience of actually doing something and putting your
money on the line and putting your reputation on the line.
Because when your back is against the wall, that’s when you
do the most learning, right? When I had a phone call with
one of our clients and he said, “Hey, man, this launch is
about to go off. I’m expecting millions and millions of dollars.
Are you sure this thing works?” That was a—I had to make
sure that it is, right? I didn’t have the option of just like,
“Well, I read it in the book, so I’ll put that in my memory and
hopefully work on it one day.” Do the work. Do the actual
work and that’s the best advice I can give anybody looking
for a career in this field or really any field.
Kirill:

Yeah. Fantastic. That is exactly the question I was about to
ask, what advice you can give, and that’s a perfect answer.

Sam:

Oh, great. There you go. (Laughs)

Kirill:

Never say no to a challenge. There you go. Especially in data
science.

Sam:

Never say no to a challenge. And, you know, the other
thing—and this is something that I’m working with people
on my team—the other thing, especially with analytics and
with marketing, is you are going to find yourself in a
situation where you do not know the answer more often
than not, if you’re coming from an non-educated perspective
like I am. You know, if Landon asks me for something
tomorrow that I don’t know the answer to, I don’t have the
option of saying, “Sorry, man. I don’t know.” I have to then
go figure it out. And that’s something that I feel like a lot of
people think they’re really good at but may actually not be

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

31

	  

great at. You have to be willing to do the research, learn how
to do things on the fly as you run into challenges.
I know a lot of people in our engineering team who became
engineers and developers by just doing exactly that. They
would come up with a concept. They’d be like, “Hey, I want
to make an app that does this.” And then they’d be like,
“Okay, well, what’s the first thing I need to know?” And they
would google it, and then they would do that, and then they
would google the next thing and they would google the next
thing and sure enough, after months and months of hard
work and research, they had something that worked. And
then you’re able to retain all that information and build on
it. So, yeah, don’t turn down any projects and be willing to
be unstoppable, which is actually one of our values painted
on the wall here. Be unstoppable. Learn the thing that you
need to learn in order to do the job.
Kirill:

Thank you. Very inspiring. Just some great advice, and
hopefully everybody takes it to heart. And my next question
is what is—like, building on top of that, it’s a very inspiring
and passionate thing to not say no to a challenge, and
especially in data science, and figure things out. What would
you say is your most favourite thing about being a data
scientist?

Sam:

Oh, man. My most favourite thing about being in data
science or working in analytics? I will tell you one of my
favourite things was it really taught me how to deal with
being wrong, which is something that I don’t think many
people are good at, myself included. You know, we all tend to
think that we’re right 99% of the time, and nothing will set
you straight, as far as being wrong about something, like
data will.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

32

	  

I spent a lot of time when I first started doing this job—a lot
of time coming up with really great ideas, fleshing them out
perfectly, executing them only to find out that I was 100%
incorrect and it was a total failure. And it’s weird to say that
that’s my favourite part, but it actually is. Because only in
marketing—well, that’s probably not fair—but marketing
especially is one area of business, or life in general, where
you have the tools and the ability to prove a theory without a
doubt, especially if you use statistical significance, but
without a doubt, you know whether or not something works.
There is no ambiguity, there is no emotion, there’s no
arguing. It’s just, “Did it work? Yes or no?” And that is so
powerful, to be able to say, “This was the strategy we tried. It
didn’t work. Where do we go from here?” I love that part.
That’s probably my favourite part.
Kirill:

Fantastic. Great. Great overview. So moving on to kind of
like the overall view of where you’re sitting and from what
you know about data. It was interesting how you corrected
the question for the previous one where I said, “What’s your
most favourite thing about being a data scientist?” and you
said, “Being in data science or working analytics,” which is
fair because your title probably isn’t directly data science,
but the stuff you do is on a data science level.
And hence my next question is, from what you see about the
world and what you’ve already experienced with data in your
role and in your life, where do you think the field of data
science and just data analytics is going? What do you think
our listeners should prepare for in the future to be ready for
a career in data?

Sam:

That’s a great question. I think that—and maybe my opinion
is a little biased here because I work for a software company

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

33

	  

that provides data, but I think that software nowadays,
especially in the business and marketing space, which is the
space that I work in primarily, every bit of software that you
could possibly get for your business and for marketing is
going to include data analysis or metrics dashboards, or
whatever their version of that is, in their tool. And what
anyone who’s listening here can do to elevate beyond that,
because what that’s going to do is a lot of people are going to
think, “Okay, cool, I’ve got the data. Why would I hire a data
scientist? Why would I hire a data analyst when I have a tool
that tells me what I need to know?”
But what I’m finding in my research and in using tools and
in our own product development is that there is a whole
another level to data science and to analytics and into
metrics that will not be covered by basic software solutions.
And the best thing that you can do as an aspiring data
scientist is learn what the difference is, learn what they’re
not providing. And by the way—little spoiler alert—most of
them aren’t providing statistical significance, at least not yet,
so that’s a great way to start. I mean, I know that our tool
and none of our competitors’ tools do, so that’s a great place
to start if you’re trying to prove value as a data and
marketing analyst.
But learn the difference, right? Learn the difference between
the basic data that they’re providing and the data that you
can provide as someone trained in this field, and that is how
you become invaluable to a company, is being able to take
the data that they provide and take it to the next level and
provide extra value to your employer or to your own
business or whatever.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

34

	  

Kirill:

Fantastic! That is a great summary. So, basically look into
things that do not come pre-packaged with the solutions
that are offered on the market place or in the target
company that you want to have a career in. Or maybe you
already have a career in that company and just look around
and see what else you can add to enhance that data and
those decisions that are being made.

Sam:

Well, I’ll tell you right now, especially because you said like
80% of your audience are people looking for jobs in this
field. I’ve got a meeting with Lena in like an hour or
whatever, and if I go in there and she fires me, the very first
thing I’m going to do is I’m going to find software companies
or whatever field I want to work in, and I’m probably going to
try to apply as a marketing person and as a data person.
What I’m going to do is I’m going to check out their websites,
I’m going to dig around in the source code of their websites,
find what tools they’re using, and then do some research on
what data and metrics those tools are providing, and then
I’m going to take it a step further and that’s what I’m going
to bring in my interview. To be completely honest, that’s
exactly what I’m going to do.

Kirill:

Fantastic! Well, let’s hope Lena doesn’t fire you. (Laughs)

Sam:

Yeah, let’s hope. (Laughs)

Kirill:

Yeah, that is a great tip. Yeah, there you go. If somebody
listening to this podcast specifically wants to get into data
science and marketing, that is golden advice. Just go to the
website of a company that you have an interview with, rightclick on the website in Chrome, select “view source code”
and go through their source code and find out what tools

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

35

	  

they use for their marketing and see how you can add value.
I bet nobody else in the interview is going to do that.
Sam:

Nobody else is going to. And in fact, I’ll even give you a tool
that helps a lot with that. There’s a website called
builtwith.com. If you check that out, you pop in the URL of
any page, you can see what technologies they’re using so
that makes it even easier for you. So that’s what I would do.
I think they charge for something but you can do that
searching stuff for free. So I would do that. In fact, I know a
consultant of ours—we certify people to be consultants for
our product—and I know a consultant of ours, I was just
talking with him the other week, and he was telling me that
this is actually how he built his business. He would go to the
website builtwith.com, find businesses in his area that were
using Ontraport, or using a competitor of Ontraport, and
then put together like a pitch and then e-mail them and say
like, “Hey, this is what you’re using. This is where you’re
going wrong. This is what I can help you do. What do you
think?” And he built a very successful business doing that.
So if I was looking for a job, that’s the first thing I would do.
Yeah.

Kirill:

Fantastic! Thank you very much. Builtwith.com – guys,
check it out. All right, thank you, Sam. We’re nearing the
end. It was a great pleasure having you on board on this
podcast. Going forward, how can our listeners contact you,
follow you or find you on the Internet so they can learn more
about your career?

Sam:

Boy, that’s a good question. And it’s funny, ironically for a
marketing guy, I don’t really use social media all that much.
I mean, I have a Facebook page. You’re welcome to find me
on Facebook and add me, but I don’t post anything

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

36

	  

insightful about data. I just talk about video games and
comic books and stuff. So that might not be helpful. If you
do have any questions or you are interested in what I’m up
to, I do write for our blog which you can find on our website
or just go to ontraport.com/blog. I occasionally will write a
blog post there. I’m actually working on one right now. So I
will talk about marketing and analytics and stuff like that on
there. And if you have any questions about anything, my email address is sam@ontraport.com. Feel free to e-mail me.
Don’t get mad at me if I don’t respond right away because I
actually do have a job that I have to do, but I’m happy to
share whatever I know.
Kirill:

Fantastic! Thank you very much. And we’ll share those links
on the show notes, including the blog post, so hopefully by
the time this podcast is out your blog post will be ready and
we’ll get people checking it out. And one final question: What
would you say is your one favourite book that you can
recommend to our listeners for them to become more data
savvy or just improve their life in general?

Sam:

So I actually have a couple different answers to this
question. The book answer, the real tangible book answer
would be a book called “Predictive Analytics: The Power to
Predict Who Will Click, Buy, Lie, or Die.” It’s written by Eric
Siegel. You can find it on Amazon or whatever. That’s a great
book. So I love that. It’s kind of an introductory book to the
concept of predictive analytics, which is what I deal with a
lot. So I encourage you to check that out if you’re looking for
a book.
That said, I love reading blog posts. That’s what I spend a lot
of my time reading. I love Kissmetrics blog. If you’re not
familiar with them, I think it’s just kissmetrics.com. They’ve

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

37

	  

got a great blog for data and analytics and stuff like that. I
don’t actually use their tool, so I can’t speak to the quality of
the tool, but I know their blog is great. So check out their
blog.
And then I have a really niche one, but I would just be doing
you a disservice if I didn’t tell you. If you’re doing Facebook
ads, if you’re into Facebook ads and you’re running numbers
on Facebook ads specifically, check out a guy named Jon
Loomer – that’s J-O-N-L-O-O-M-E-R, and his website is just
jonloomer.com. The guy has a killer blog, great advice on
how to run numbers on that stuff and how to improve your
Facebook ad campaigns based on data. I highly, highly
recommend that. I spend a lot of time reading that guy’s
blog. So those are sort of three sources that I like a lot.
Kirill:

Fantastic! Thank you. So I’ll just summarize those. We’ve got
“Predictive Analytics: The Power to Predict Who Will Click,
Buy, Lie, or Die”. I forgot the author’s name but we’ll put
that in the show notes.

Sam:

Eric Siegel.

Kirill:

Eric Siegel. We’ve got Kissmetrics. That’s by Neil Patel, right?

Sam:

I think so. Yeah, I think it’s him and another guy, but yeah.

Kirill:

Okay. So the blog Kissmetrics, and we’ve got another blog –
jonloomer.com. So check those out if you want to propel
your career in data science in marketing. Thank you very
much, Sam, for coming on the show. It was a great pleasure
to have you.

Sam:

Thank you so much for having me. It’s an honour. This is
my first podcast appearance. (Laughs)

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

38

	  

Kirill:

All right. So we’ll definitely share everything with our
listeners. Get ready to be bombarded with e-mails and
contact requests.

Sam:

(Laughs) Yeah, I know. I kind of realized after I said that that
maybe I shouldn’t have given my email but screw it.
(Laughs)

Kirill:

All right. Take care, my friend. Thank you so much.

Sam:

Okay. Thank you so much.

Kirill:

So there you have it. I hope you enjoyed today’s show. And
my personal favourite part was when Sam discussed how he
goes about taking data that he gets, which is lots and lots of
data, and only leaving the data that is indeed necessary for
his analysis. So to speak, cutting down the data. And part of
that is of course setting up the data points in advance so
that he only gets the relevant data. But even when he gets a
lot more irrelevant data, he knows how to go about cutting it
down. So that’s a very important skill to have, preparing the
right data for your analysis so you don’t get overwhelmed
and lost in all that data.
And of course, it was so great of Sam to share his tool which
he uses for testing for statistical significance. We’ve got that
tool prepared for you so if you want to download it, come on
over to www.superdatascience.com/23. You can get it there
plus you can get the show notes and the transcript for this
episode and all of the links to all of the resources and
materials mentioned here. So we extend a huge thank you to
Sam for being on the show and to Ontraport.
And finally, if you’re a small business owner or a fellow
entrepreneur, I highly recommend for you to check out

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

39

	  

Ontraport. They can really make your life much easier with
their business automation software. So head on over to
www.ontraport.com and check out what they have there to
offer you. And on that note we’re going to wrap up today’s
episode. I can’t wait to see you next time. And until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/23

40

