	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 25
WITH
KIMBERLY DEAS

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

1

	  

Kirill:

This is episode number 25, with Data Analyst Kimberly
Deas.
(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Hello and welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. Super
excited to see you here once again, and today we've got an
interesting guest. Today we've got Kimberley Deas joining us.
And Kimberly is using data science for something very, very
noble. Kimberly is a data analyst in the space of medical
research, and she uses data science to help provide
healthcare and support services for individuals living with
HIV and AIDS. So a very noble cause, as you can imagine.
And in this podcast, we're going to discuss some very
interesting topics relating to things that Kimberly has
encountered during her profession.
So for example, we're going to talk about how Kimberly
transitioned from using standard academic approaches and
philosophy to using data science in her day to day role to
help people and fast track her research. Also, we're going to
discuss how Kimberly uses two tools. She uses R for the
analytics, and Tableau for the presentation. Which I found
to be a very interesting discussion, because a lot of the time,
people get side tracked with just one of the tools. So either
people use Tableau for everything, or people use R for

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

2

	  

everything, including visualization. Whereas Kimberly has
found that sweet spot of doing the analytics in R and then
passing on the results to Tableau and creating amazing
reports for management and for the presentations that she
does using Tableau.
So that's going to be a very interesting discussion. Also,
we're going to talk about women in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. And Kimberly is going to
share some of her experience, how she created a career in
this space. Also, she will provide some tips and advice for
women out there who are looking to get into the field of
STEM or how those who are looking to propel their STEM
careers going forward.
And of course, there's going to be lots and lots more value in
this podcast, and I can't wait for you to check it out. Without
further ado, I bring to you Kimberly Deas.
(background music plays)
Hello everybody, and welcome to the SuperDataScience
podcast. Today I’ve got a very interesting guest, Kimberly
Deas, who is a data analyst at the UT Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas. Hi Kimberly, how are you today?
Kimberly:

I'm great, how are you Kirill?

Kirill:

I'm good, thank you very much. How's the weather there in
Dallas, Texas?

Kimberly:

It is finally starting to get cold so I’m very happy, because it
was humid and hot up until maybe a week or two ago. I’m
actually kidding, but it takes a while to actually get cool here
in Dallas.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

3

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, I can imagine. How cold does it get, like the coldest in
winter? Does it snow there?

Kimberly:

You know, I think they get a lot of ice in the winter time.
This is actually my first winter in Dallas, so I’m still trying to
acclimate to the weather. The biggest issue I’m having is
with my allergies. Completely different set of allergens here;
I’ve come from the East Coast. But otherwise it’s a wonderful
city, lots of wonderful people and lots of career
opportunities, especially in data science.

Kirill:

Fantastic. All right, so the way we met—for our listeners—is
through our courses, right? I think you wrote me a message.
Do you remember what that was about?

Kimberly:

Actually, I don’t remember what the message was about. But
I’m enrolled in two of your courses – the R-programming
course and also Tableau.

Kirill:

Okay, fantastic. So those are both tools that you use at your
workplace?

Kimberly:

I do.

Kirill:

Okay, that’s great. So tell us a little bit about what you do.
What is your profession? How would you describe it?
Because I read through your LinkedIn and it just like totally
blew over my head. You’re doing a PhD, you’re in medical
research, you’re using data and you’re doing tutoring. So
you’re in so many spaces. Just in a couple of sentences, how
would you describe what you do to somebody off the street,
somebody who you’ve just met?

Kimberly:

So the basic synopsis of what I do is I basically use
information and we try to use that information to – we take
data, convert it to information, I should say, and then we try

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

4

	  

to use that to impact the lives of individuals who are HIVpositive. So in addition to working with UT Southwestern,
the Medical Center at Dallas, I am also employed with an
organization called the Dallas Family Access Network. And
it’s a Ryan White Part-D funded organization. Again, we
provide medical services and support to individuals in the
Metropolitan Dallas area who are HIV-positive or have
diagnosed AIDS.
So that’s what I do. I try to take the information, analyse it
and use it in ways to impact some of the programming
decisions that we make about communities that we want to
go into to address what has become a national issue of
health disparities, particularly in HIV incidence and AIDS
occurrence in minority communities.
Kirill:

Wow, that’s a very noble thing to do, to apply data science to
help people in difficult situations. So how did you get into
this field? Like, what is your background? What did you
study back at university?

Kimberly:

So I originally came into the field through a friend of mine.
Her name is Laurie Pressley-Mitchell, and she’s over in an
organization called Black Women in Technology. Their main
office is in Los Angeles. And her background was in
respiratory therapy. While she was working as a respiratory
therapist at a hospital, she also acquired a bachelor’s degree
in Computer Science. She and I became friends over the
Internet.
So having lengthy discussions about ways that her clinical
background could be applied to a health care setting, she
talked to me about different fields — health information
technology, health data science, which is a subfield of data
science. So, thinking about ways that I could use the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

5

	  

background that I had already acquired as a research
scientist, you know, acquire some additional skills and then
be able to continue to use that in a research setting. So
shout-out to my girlfriend Laurie.
Kirill:

Nice. Big shout-out to Laurie. So what attracted you in that
field? Is it a bit different to research science, like what you
were already doing at the time?

Kimberly:

It’s actually quite different except that most research
scientists are aware that you need to apply statistical
techniques in order to verify or confirm some of the
information that you’re generating in a laboratory. So I had
previously been involved in cancer research. I was predoctoral fellow at the National Cancer Institute for a year
where I worked in genetic epidemiology. So a lot of the
nature of that work involved looking at genetic
predispositions for specific types of cancer. We looked at
BRCA1 mutations, so a lot of that genomic information can
be interpreted as data, and then we would use that
information to make changes in how people who carry
BRCA1 mutations should be cared for should they be
diagnosed with breast cancer.
That’s how I initially got into the field, coming from a bench
science. I started off doing laboratory, working with mice
and rats and things of that nature, and then gradually
moved over to more of the analytical side, actually analysing
some of the data that we were generating in the laboratory
and again, drawing conclusions about some of the studies
that we were doing. So we repeatedly kept coming back to
doing a lot of statistical analysis. And so coming from
epidemiology, the jump to data science was a pretty logical
one and a very enjoyable one too.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

6

	  

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. And how is it different? Can you explain?
Because I hear a lot of examples where people use R
programming in a research setting. How is the way you
apply the statistical modelling in your epidemiology career
path, and then how you move to data science, how is that
different? What did the transition involve?

Kimberly:

So right now I’m using R programming to do logistical
regression, where I’m looking at two different populations
and trying to determine if there’s any statistically significant
differences in those two populations. I would say that
epidemiology, at least the area that I was involved in initially
– it was infectious diseases epidemiology. And so we were
using epidemiological techniques in order to map outbreaks
of certain specific diseases.
So, again, I think that this designation of data science
actually was probably born out of epidemiology, although
there might be some discussions from folks in the field who
have a different take on it. But I think it’s just a matter of
how you apply the information and how you use it. It’s just
that a lot of these same types of techniques can be used.
Now, with that said, most of what I found in epidemiology
didn’t move in the direction of using complex programs like
R in order to draw statistical conclusions. They used
programs like Stata and SAS. So I think it was basically just
a way to extend some of that knowledge that you’re able to
gain from basic epidemiological research and actually draw
some additional conclusions using programming languages
like R, which are quite easy to use once you get the swing of
things.

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, gotcha. And how did you find the difference
between SAS and R? I just have to ask this question because

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

7

	  

with the trends that we’re seeing, how R is getting more and
more popular, like even pushing these more enterprisebased or enterprise-oriented and more expensive tools out of
the market. What did you find is the difference between SAS
and R and which one did you prefer?
Kimberly:

Well, because I’m using R a lot more, I would say R for that
reason. In epidemiology we use a lot of SAS. I’d probably
hesitate to make a direct comparison because I think what
happens is that, because of the interest in public health, I
think that they’re more used to using more simplistic ways
of doing analysis. Whereas I’ve noticed that people,
particularly in cancer research use more programmatic
languages, like R, in order to do statistical analysis. So I
think they both have a role, depending on what types of
conclusions you’re trying to draw from the research and the
work that you’re doing. It’s just a personal preference.
One of my favourite analogies, having discussions with
people that I work with in HIV who are still basically using
Excel spreadsheets and databases sometimes, is that there
are two modes of transportation that people can use to get to
work. You can either ride a bicycle or you can drive a car. I
see SAS more as riding a bicycle. It will get you there, it
might be a bit slow, whereas R is a car, the way to get to
your destination a little faster. That makes it really
simplistic and it might offend some but that’s—again, being
relatively new to the field, that’s my initial feeling about the
differences between R and SAS. One is just a more advanced
way of doing pretty much the same thing.

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. That’s very interesting. Yeah, and again,
people have different opinions. Somebody might be more
into SAS, somebody more into R, and it’s about how

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

8

	  

everybody feels their way around these tools and
understands how to use them. And you mentioned you used
logistic regression in R, which is interesting. It’s a very
powerful technique. I can imagine how that would be helpful
in what you’re doing. Can you tell us a bit more about how
exactly you apply it? More specifically, what kind of
challenges does logistic regression help you solve in your
day-to-day role? Again, if you can disclose this information,
because I can imagine some of it would be sensitive.
Kimberly:

Right. So, because we deal with datasets that involve actual
patients, I can’t go into too much detail because of PHIPA
regulations. But what I can say is that—again, it’s relatively
new, I think, to use a programming language like R to make
conclusions about different populations in terms of the field
overall. Most of the people that I notice in the literature that
are using R are people who—actually, a lot of them are
actually basic scientists, which is really interesting. So to be
able to use it in a public health realm is relatively new.
I think for me, though, it’s trying to move the HIV world into
using some of these more advanced techniques. It’s a great
idea in general, although like I said, it’s relatively new. And
again, it’s a really quick and easy way for me to—something
that I might notice graphically, like if I’m comparing two
different populations. Again, I look at health disparities and
barriers to care. So if I’m looking at one population where,
for example, they may have more health care resources, and
then I look at another population, I’m able to use logistic
regression to say if there are really any statistical differences
between the two populations in terms of who may be at a
greater risk of being HIV-positive.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

9

	  

And then the program that I work with uses that information
to make some designations about how and where to apply
resources. So that’s the power of what I’m able to do with R,
to be able to help the program that I work for make
decisions about how they want to allocate resources. But
again, it’s relatively new and most of the people that are in
the field are using more basic techniques, but I think the
power of R is that you’re able to generate this information
and it’s statistically sound and able to challenge it.
And that’s no matter what you do, when you’re trying to get
your information published, is that you have to be able to
draw conclusions that others are able to duplicate. I think
that one of the powers of using R is that the results are
pretty irrefutable. You’re able to demonstrate, or not
demonstrate, depending on what your hypothesis is, that the
conclusion that you’re drawing is actually quite accurate. So
that’s, for me, the power of using R for logistical regression.
I’m able to back up what I think I can see graphically when
I’m looking at two different populations, so that’s really
powerful.
Kirill:

Yeah, that’s definitely a huge advantage of R. And also that
it’s free, right? So if your research is available publicly, then
anybody who has a computer and has a desire to just
recreate your results can just download R, install it, run the
same packages that you ran, and just see the results for
themselves and make some minor tweaks. So they can build
upon your research.

Kimberly:

Exactly. And the R community that’s available for asking
questions is very active. You can go on Google, you can go
on Kaggle, a number of different sites where you can ask
these types of questions. And again, because the software is

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

10

	  

free, there’s a very active R community out there always
willing to help. So it’s been a relatively smooth transition
into data science in large part because of the large
community of people who are using programs like R and are
so willing to help people who are new to the field like myself.
Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree. And are you seeing any initial results
yet from using R? Like, have you been able to deliver some
insights that have, for instance, changed the way things are
currently done in your organization or other places?

Kimberly:

Well, I actually have. I recently was able to prove my first
hypothesis. I should also specify that the nature of the work
that I do for the organization that I work for is more along
the lines of quality improvement versus clinical research,
which is significantly different in terms of your hypothesis
testing, in terms of the population sizes that you’re dealing
with. And so I’ve absolutely recently just confirmed my first
hypothesis and I’m actually in the process of writing my first
manuscript in a number of years. So when I return from the
holidays, I will be speaking to my advisers—both my
[inaudible 16:42] adviser and obviously my adviser where I
work at UT Southwestern—about some of the preliminary
results and I’m tentatively scheduled to present these results
at an HIV clinical conference that UT Southwestern has
weekly on HIV. I’m scheduled to present that in April of next
year, so I’m very excited about the results and looking
forward to submitting the manuscript for publication some
time in the near future.

Kirill:

Okay, fantastic. Congratulations on that. It sounds like a big
step ahead. You’ve mentioned you’re in a different space to
clinical research, you’re in quality improvement, was that
right?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

11

	  

Kimberly:

Exactly correct. So we do quality improvement. Again, Ryan
White supported through HRSA, and a very significant part
of being able to address what are clear and distinct health
disparities in terms of specific populations who have higher
incidences and prevalence of HIV and AIDS in the
community.

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. So that’s a very interesting role that you’re in
right now. And I noticed from your LinkedIn that you also
are the founder and president of Kimist Konsulting and
Tutoring Services. So you’ve been doing that for 4½ years
now. Is that like some side hobby that you have? It looks like
something that you’re passionate about if you’re doing that
in parallel with your job.

Kimberly:

I am. So that actually was born of—I had worked in the
pharmaceutical industry doing basic science research and
had found myself in search of challenges where I wouldn’t
have to make decisions about good science and integrity.
That’s a politically correct way of putting that. So out of that
experience, I decided to create an organization that would
allow me to continue working with younger people,
particularly minorities and especially women, to encourage
them by being an example of how to navigate the STEM field
– Science, Technology, Engineering and Math.
And initially I started off as just a tutor. I worked with
medical students because I’ve taken a number of medical
school classes at Georgetown Medical School while I was a
graduate student there. And I also worked with graduate
students preparing for the GRE, pharmacy students
preparing to take the PCAT, all the way down to elementary
school students who are taking basic science and math
courses. So in a lot of ways, it’s my way of giving back to the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

12

	  

community. There were so many people that were
instrumental in helping me get to this point that I wanted
find a way to give back and, again, I had some challenges
working in the pharmaceutical industry, so I started working
as a tutor and decided to found my own organization. Again,
it’s been going on for about 4 years.
I don’t have the time that I used to have in my schedule now
because in addition to working full-time as a data analyst,
I’m also a PhD student and attending Tarrant County
College, where I’m pursuing a Certificate in Health
Information Technology. So I’m extremely busy, and so I
don’t have as much time as I would like to have to work with
people in a tutoring capacity. But that’s one of the things
that I certainly hope to build upon in the future once I
complete my PhD.
Kirill:

Yeah, I can totally imagine how you’re short on time and
you’ve got so much on your plate with your PhD and the job
and also this tutoring setup or tutoring business that you’re
running and giving back to the community. And I think
that’s a great thing that you’re doing. It’s amazing to be
passionate about something like that when you’re helping
other people. So just through the understanding that for you
to get where you are other people helped you.
I have the exact same sense of gratitude for those people
who helped me in my journey. So you mentioned that you
have a passion to help women navigate the space of STEM.
For our listeners, STEM stands for Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics. Historically, it has been a
predominantly male-dominated area. What would you say
are the main challenges for women to get into STEM and be
successful in the area of STEM?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

13

	  

Kimberly:

I would probably say the largest challenge is that even after
all the successes that women have had in the area of STEM,
that being stereotyped into specific roles and specific fields is
still a big problem. I think the second most important thing
is being able to identify mentors, people who are there to
encourage you to commit to the field. Interestingly, I read an
article last fall that said that Calculus One is the great
limiting step, to use a biochemist term, in why women don’t
stick with STEM.
It’s interesting because I also had to retake Calculus One,
but I was fortunate in that I was surrounded by people who
encouraged me to hang in there. That repeating Calculus
One is not indicative of your abilities in the future in STEM,
but I think the message a lot of women are clearly getting—
based on the numbers—is that if you can’t be successful in
that one course, or general chemistry or general biology,
then you won’t be successful in STEM. So I think the
conversation needs to turn more towards how internal
biases can affect how we communicate with male students
versus how we communicate with female students. It’s a big
problem, but I think that it begins with an open and honest
conversation about what some of the real issues are. And
then from there we can work on making some changes.

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, I totally agree. I’ve met a lot of very smart
women through my bachelor’s in Physics and when I was
working at Deloitte. There’s lots and lots of very successful,
very smart women who have overcome these challenges and
have found their path and their career in the space of STEM.
It’s a very sensitive topic that has been floating around for
quite some time and finally it’s surfacing that yes, there is
this kind of prejudice and it is hard for women to find their

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

14

	  

path in this space. And there’s lots of organizations that are
helping out so it’s fantastic to see that you’re doing the
same.
What would your one most important piece of advice be to
those of our listeners who are female and who are listening
to this podcast right now who want to get into data science
or some other fields of STEM and need some encouragement
or guidance? What would you say is your one most
important piece of advice for them?
Kimberly:

I would say the one most important piece of advice is to
identify someone, male or female, who believes in what
you’re trying to do and stick to them as closely as you can.
One of the interesting aspects of my graduate education is
that I initially relocated to Texas with the idea or with the
intent of attending graduate school in biomedical informatics
at an institution here in Texas. But after a year in the
program I found myself not getting the support and
encouragement that I needed to get to the point that I
envisioned myself in terms of my career. So I initiated a
transfer and have been very happy to be at Rutgers
University, where I do feel a very strong sense of support
and encouragement.
So I think the most important thing would be to find an
institution or an individual, preferably both, who will
support and encourage you, but more importantly not be
afraid to make a change if you find that what you’re doing or
the decisions you’ve made isn’t working for you. There’s
nothing wrong with making a change. Sometimes I feel that
we have this idea that if we start somewhere and we don’t
finish, that that imparts a sense of failure, and nothing can
be further from the truth. There’s a lot about finding a place

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

15

	  

where you fit in and where you’re going to be supported and
encouraged. So seeking those people out would be the most
important thing, I think, about going into a field like data
science.
Kirill:

Fantastic. That’s some very valuable advice and it all
revolves around the notion of mentors which we’ve—several
guests have mentioned this on the podcast. We’ve had some
in-depth discussion how mentors are extremely important in
every person’s life, regardless of whether you’re going into
data science or not. It’s just an important thing to have
somebody to share your thoughts and feelings with and also
get some feedback and have these on-going discussions.
Somebody who’s going to, like you say, support you through
your career and life. It’s something that helps in difficult
times and helps guide you as well in good times, just to
understand in which way to develop further.

Kimberly:

And I just want to give you a shout-out for making R and
Tableau so interesting. Your classes are fantastic. I would
strenuously encourage your listeners to take one of your
courses. It has made a significant difference in my being
able to learn Tableau. And I’ve actually looked at some of the
courses that are available on Coursera in particular,
because there was a lot of positive feedback about one
particular set of R courses, but it wasn’t until I came across
your course where everything started to click and make
sense for me. So I just wanted to thank you for providing
that information to those of us who are trying to get into the
field of data science.

Kirill:

Oh wow, thank you very much. Thank you. I always
appreciate great feedback. Well, that’s kind of my way of
giving back to the community, like you give back with your

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

16

	  

consulting services and helping women navigate their STEM.
That’s the least I can do, to help people navigate the waters
of R programming and Tableau, which can be extremely
complex. So I’m glad that you enjoyed those courses.
And that’s a good segue moving back into R and Tableau
and the tools that you use in your day-to-day role. Can you
tell us a bit more? So, we talked about logistic regression.
And just like all these tools that you are using or you have
used, such as R, Tableau, and you mentioned even Excel,
and that you do some database design, so I’m assuming
there must be other – so there’s some MySQL there and
Access. What would you say are some other interesting
techniques or methodologies that you use in any of these
tools that you would like to point out to our listeners so that
there’s something that they can digest and maybe look into
for their own careers and professions?
Kimberly:

I think that one thing I would encourage people to do is to
not be afraid of what can be seen as a steep learning curve
with some of these more advanced techniques. Specifically,
I’m referring to Tableau, and it’s not inherently difficult to
learn. It can be real difficult to use the different dashboards
and figure out what all the features are. But I think that
what you get out of that are amazing data visualizations
which can be critical to communicating whatever point
you’re trying to make to audiences that may not be as
STEM-astute. So I use Tableau extensively to make points
that again, make it more clear for some of the people,
individuals that I deal with on a daily basis who may or may
not have the scientific background to understand. Most
people, you can explain something in words, but if you’re
able to make a visual presentation of it, it makes a lot more

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

17

	  

sense. So that’s the extent that I use Tableau pretty
extensively and it’s my preference in terms of all of the data
visualization software that’s out there. It’s the one that I use
most extensively.
Kirill:

Gotcha. And that is actually something that I find very
forward-looking in your position because I’ve seen a lot of
situations where people use R in medical research. It’s one
of the most popular tools and I think that the Johns
Hopkins University is all about using R for medical
applications and research as well. And a lot of the time I find
that that’s where people limit themselves. They just use R
and then they use ggplot2, which is an R package, which is
fantastic, and they use it for visualization. Ggplot2 is
fantastic for visualization, like ad hoc visualization for
research, for trying to understand how something works,
trying to build it. As you’re doing the analytics, you need
this ad hoc research.
But if you’re creating a full-blown presentation that you
want to, like you say, get across to people who might not be
as STEM-astute as you are or as other people that you
normally interact with, or even if you want to create a
beautiful presentation for a conference, then I see Tableau
having so much advantage over ggplot2, or for that matter
any R visualization package, that I just don’t understand
why people choose to limit themselves and not explore the
world of Tableau.
Perhaps it could be due to the steep learning curve of
Tableau, even though I think Tableau is easier to pick up
than R. And also it could be because maybe people just want
to stick to that one tool, R. But at the same time, it’s great to
see that you’ve chosen this pathway of separating the two.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

18

	  

You do your analytics in R; you do all the regression and all
that other type of modelling in R, and then when you need to
create a presentation, you switch to Tableau. So, how would
you say you actually discovered Tableau and why did you
decide to make the separation between the analytics and
visualization and find the right tool for each of the jobs?
What prompted you to venture down that path?
Kimberly:

You know, I’m actually thinking. I’m not really sure how I
even learned that Tableau existed. I honestly think it was
through—you know, I can’t remember. I’ve only been using it
about a year. Maybe not quite a year, maybe I started in
January, I think. But if I had to guess where I think it came
from, I actually think it came from looking through the
courses that you were offering that you teach through
Udemy. Is that correct? I think I got that right.
Yeah, I think that’s where I actually learned about Tableau,
it was through looking through your course listings for
different data visualization tools and recognizing that, again,
because a lot of the information that I generate is going to be
used to not only communicate with physicians and
clinicians but also with people in the community who are
HIV-positive and are part of the various Ryan White
committees that most local cities, large cities have. And so
trying to find the best tool that would be understood by
people of various backgrounds was what initially prompted
me to start using Tableau. And it’s worked quite [inaudible].

Kirill:

Yeah. And so would you recommend Tableau as a tool to
people in professions similar to yours?

Kimberly:

I absolutely would recommend it, although someone recently
turned me onto Microsoft—

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

19

	  

Kirill:

Power BI?

Kimberly:

Right. (Laughs) Microsoft BI. I have it downloaded on my
computer. I haven’t started playing around with it just yet.
As a competitor, I would imagine—like I said, I use Tableau,
I’m happy with it. Someone else suggested that I look at it.
And I think that one of the other members of one of the
other research groups that I work with in the infectious
disease department actually uses BI. But yeah, I’m happy
with Tableau. It works for the needs that we need it for, and
I absolutely would recommend it. And as you mentioned,
ggplot2 works well, but when you want to make an impact I
think Tableau is the way to go.

Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree. And just on Power BI, there’s actually a
couple of tools that are in the space of visualization. And the
leaders, I would say, are Tableau, then we’ve got Microsoft
Power BI, we’ve got QlikView, we’ve got QlikSense, and then
we’ve got a couple of others. There’s an IBM tool which
they’re promoting and so on. Yeah, I would say Tableau is by
far the most robust tool. And then I would say next, in my
view, would come Microsoft Power BI, the one you
mentioned. They are really putting a lot of effort into it. They
only launched like a couple of years ago. Tableau has been
around for 10 years or so—as far as I remember, 10 or 6,
like, many years. And Microsoft Power BI has only been
around since like 2015, or somewhere thereabouts. But
they’re already really catching up to Tableau.
And the big difference is that of course Microsoft BI is free,
whereas Tableau has a very large fee associated with it. And
so it’d be interesting to see how that goes. And if anybody
listening is into visualization tools and wants to pick the
right one for their job, there’s a great report – it’s called the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

20

	  

Gartner Report, it comes out every year around February.
And what you need to google is just google the “Gartner
magic quadrant for BI (Business Intelligence).” They’ve like
set up this quadrant on the Y axis, I think, you have
completeness of vision, and then on the X axis you have
the—I forgot. I think it’s like what they have on offer—what
kind of functionality they have on offer in that tool, and then
they plot out all these different visualization tools. So it’s
really cool to observe that. So that’s very interesting, that we
went into a bit of visualization.
So tell us how your PhD is going. You mentioned before the
podcast that you just started your PhD. What is your PhD
going to be about?
Kimberly:

My PhD is in biomedical informatics, and I’m looking to
concentrate in public health informatics. And given the fact
that I’m very happily working with HIV and AIDS individuals
in terms of quality improvement type projects, I’m looking to
have a long-term career using informatics tools to improve
the lives of people who are HIV-positive and have AIDS. So
I’m hoping to focus my dissertation and my coursework in
public health informatics. So that’s the concentration I’m
actually looking to as a PhD student at Rutgers University.

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. And if you can disclose this, what are some of
the ways that you look into that you can improve the lives of
people that are HIV-positive?

Kimberly:

So, again, there is a significant health disparity with who is
HIV-positive in this country, and it unfortunately tends to
fall
disproportionately
on
poor
communities
and
communities of colour. So what I’m hoping to do by using
advanced techniques in informatics is to be able to impart
some changes both at the clinical level and the community

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

21

	  

level which will allow us to address some of these disparities
and improve the lives of people who are HIV-positive and
who are looking to seek proper care for their HIV with the
ultimate goal of preventing the progression to AIDS. I’ve been
an AIDS counsellor when I was an undergraduate student,
so that’s how I first got exposed to working with the HIV and
AIDS community. So I kind of moved away from it a little bit
and then have come back to it and have been very happy to
be back, being able to apply some of this new technology in
the field of HIV and AIDS.
Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. I apologize for my ignorance on this topic, but
could you explain how is HIV different to AIDS? You’ve
mentioned that HIV progresses to AIDS. What is the main
difference between the two?

Kimberly:

So, individuals who are HIV-positive, it means that they
have shown a reaction to the virus which has been linked to
AIDS. AIDS is the more advanced form of the disease and
unfortunately it can be lethal for many individuals. Until the
advent of AZT, HIV was pretty much a death sentence. But
now thanks to the discovery of a lot of new drugs and drug
cocktails, people who are HIV-positive are now able to live—
as long as they take their medication – they’re able to live
lives that are comparable to people with other types of
chronic illnesses like diabetes.
So the big idea now is to keep the viral load of people who
are HIV-positive at an undetectable level. It does not mean
that they cannot transmit the disease, it just means that
there is no detectable level of virus being actively replicated
in their bodies. So that’s the condition again, that people are
able to live long, healthy, extended lives as long as they are
compliant with their physician’s orders in terms of taking

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

22

	  

their medications. So it’s a very different picture than when
AIDS first came on the scene, in the 80s I guess it was.
Initially it started off as a death sentence and now it’s
treated just like any other chronic condition, like being
diabetic.
Kirill:

Okay, so basically if somebody discovers this early on, then
they have a much higher chance of treating it properly and
still living a very healthy, an interesting and good life while
they take that medication. Is that correct?

Kimberly:

Exactly. So initially what happens with HIV is when a person
is first exposed, the literature seems to indicate that that’s
the period when the person is most highly infectious. And a
lot of times, when people are in that highly infectious stage,
they are not aware that they’re HIV-positive. So that’s why
it’s critical for people who engage in activities which put
them at higher risk, like being IV drug users or having
intimate relations with people who are IV drug users, that
they regularly get HIV tests so they can stay on top of what
their HIV status is. It’s a significant portion of people in this
country which are believed to be HIV-positive and unaware
of their status. So those are also another group of people
that many in the HIV and AIDS community are trying to
target with programs that allow for free HIV testing with the
goal and with the idea that if we can catch people early,
particularly in the infectious process, then we can prevent
the spread of the disease in the community.

Kirill:

Alright, thank you very much for that explanation. I
definitely learned quite a few new things from there. And I
must say it’s very noble of you to choose to do your PhD in
this area and actually dedicate a large portion of your life to
helping people that are suffering from this disease. And

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

23

	  

speaking of your PhD, I wanted to ask you this question.
Based on what you’ve already done in your previous roles or
in this role previously, and the way you see your PhD
coming together, the way you’re thinking about structuring
it, what role do you think data will play in your PhD? I
understand you’re still at the very start of your PhD, but at
the same time, looking forward, how do you think you will
use data in your PhD? Do you have any plans for that?
Kimberly:

I absolutely have plans. And again, I kind of very deliberately
started putting this plan together over a period of years of
meeting with different people in the field and figuring out
ways to create something that would be both a personal and
professional interest. There hasn’t been a large application,
from what I’ve been able to gather in the literature, of using
data science to specifically address health disparities. So
that’s one of the ways that I hope to develop my career in the
future, to use this information that I’m able to have access
to, de-identified of course, turn that data into valuable
information and use that information to make quality
improvements in the lives of people who are HIV-positive. It
seems like it should be a logical application of the use of
data science because it’s using every other industry,
obviously.
And now I think that the public health field is starting to
come around to some of the advantages that this data that
we already gather lots of information on can be used to
basically decrease disease burden in our communities and
improve overall public health. So that’s a pretty good
synopsis of what I’m hoping to do with my work in health
data science in the field as it applies to public health
informatics.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

24

	  

Kirill:

Fantastic. That sounds like a huge challenge and we wish
you the best of luck with that. I think that can make a very
large positive impact on many communities, not just in the
U.S. but that research could be extrapolated to other
countries as well. And speaking of that, do you actually work
internationally? Have you done any collaborations or
something like that in terms of international impact?

Kimberly:

Actually, I haven’t done any. I’m not currently participating
on any international type projects but obviously, because
the HIV burden is also pretty heavy in the continent of
Africa—as you mentioned before, a lot of the knowledge that
we’re able to gain from the application of data science to
public health and HIV and AIDS incidence can be applied
internationally in places like Africa. And so while I’m not
currently involved in anything on the international level,
there’s absolutely no reason to think that some of the
programmatic changes that we can make or create here
based on some of the analysis that I and others are doing
can certainly be applied to other places where there is a high
HIV and AIDS incidence.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. I think it will be an interesting PhD that you’ve
set up for yourself because it combines both data science
and something that you’re very passionate about. So I’m
very excited for you going there. And speaking of
accomplishments and using data, what would you say has
been your biggest win that you’ve had recently using data
science? Again, if you can share that with us. So something
that you’re proud of, something that you were able to use
data for to do differently and to create something unique.

Kimberly:

Again, because we’re in the process of writing up a
manuscript, I can’t go into too much detail about it. I forget

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

25

	  

what the phrase is when someone beats you to the punch in
terms of publishing, but yeah. So I’ve been very pleased that
basically we’ve been able to analyse this data and we have
some very important stories to tell in terms of those barriers
to care that disproportionately affect poor minority
communities. So, again, I can’t speak in too much detail
about it but I hope that information published—again, it’s
something that, because of the nature of what we do, it
won’t just be applicable to the Dallas Family Access Network
where I’m currently working with UT Southwestern, but it
could be applied to any area of the country where there are
high HIV and AIDS burdens in the community. Again, I can’t
give too specific detail right now, but I’m very pleased with
some of the results that we’ve been able to generate thus far
and I’m looking forward to 2017 when hopefully all this hard
work will come to fruition.
Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. And is it going to be a publication that people
can just read on the Internet?

Kimberly:

Absolutely. Obviously, I will provide a link to it on my
LinkedIn profile after it’s accepted for publication. And I’m
actually looking forward to participating in the International
AIDS Society meeting in Paris. That’s a dream, to go there
and hopefully be able to present this research to a larger
international community. That’s my top goal for next year,
but there’s obviously some other AIDS organizations and
meetings that are going to be held next year that would also
be a wonderful addition to my background in HIV and AIDS
research. So, yeah, 2017 is looking to be a big year for our
group.

Kirill:

Fantastic. Yeah, and Tableau will help you with that
presentation and hopefully we can get a link of that and put

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

26

	  

it on our show notes as well so people who are interested,
who are listening to this later in 2017, can get a glimpse of
what you’ve been up to and what results you’ve come up
with.
Kimberly:

Absolutely.

Kirill:

Wonderful! So we’ve got some rapid fire questions here
leading up to the end of the show. What would you say is the
biggest challenge you’ve ever faced as a data scientist?

Kimberly:

I would say just breaking into the field. Coming from a
bench science background, it was extremely difficult to
convince various individuals and HR departments that I did
have the skillset that would be required to succeed in data
science. And I would say the most important personal
characteristic you need to succeed in the field would be
tenacity. You have to be willing to start over, go back to the
drawing board, reanalyse, analyse. So coming from a bench
science research background, I had those skills, but
convincing people to give me a shot when I didn’t have the
formal training was quite challenging. So that was a large
part of why I knew I had to go back to school, because it’s
getting to be pretty competitive, and a lot of the
opportunities are open to people with computer science
backgrounds, which are helpful, but in the field of health
data science, if you don’t have some sort of background,
either in the biological sciences or in the medical sciences,
you’re at a pretty significant disadvantage. And so I was able
to parlay my interest in data science into an area which
would allow me to use my background and then be
something that I could build on for the future. So I’m very
excited about how that eventually turned out for me. Again,
it was challenging breaking into the field.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

27

	  

Kirill:

Gotcha. And what would your advice be for somebody who is
trying to break into the field who is also coming—was the
term that you used “bench science”?

Kimberly:

Yes, bench. That means I was in a laboratory.

Kirill:

Oh, gotcha. So what advice would you have for somebody
coming from a bench science background trying to break it
into the field of data science? Like you had to convince
people to give you a shot. What would you recommend them
to do to get to where they want to?

Kimberly:

I would recommend that they take advantage of any number
of big free courses that are available – specifically yours. I
would start with yours, although again, some folks
recommend others. Whatever works for you, I guess, is fine.
The idea is that you can get into it virtually for free; all you
need is an Internet connection and a computer.
So I would first maybe take a year, start with the
programming course and then work your way from there. I
call it trial by fire. The first programming course I actually
took was upon the recommendation of a family member
who’s a software engineer, and he suggested I take Java.
And I thought, “What does Java have to do with anything?”
But what it actually was, it taught me how to think like a
computer scientist which is, you know, a big part of being a
successful data scientist.
And although I don’t think you have to be a computer
scientist to be a data scientist obviously, being able to think
along the lines of a programmer has repeatedly proved to be
one of the smartest things I ever did. Because it made every
other language I got exposed to that much easier. Again, my
recommendation would be, take about a year, start with the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

28

	  

programming course – I would not suggest R – something
like C++, just so that you can get used to some of the
syntaxes used in programming, and the way of thinking and
looking at problems, and then build from there. That would
be my suggestion.
Kirill:

Gotcha. Great advice. Thank you very much. Next question
is very interesting: What is your one most favourite thing
about being a data scientist or being able to apply data in
your day-to-day role?

Kimberly:

This one is really easy. One of the things that’s particularly
frustrating about being a bench scientist is that it can take
anywhere from years to decades to see something you’re
working on, an idea you have come to fruition. One of the
great things about data science is that with a couple of
manipulations you can tell quite easily whether or not you
need to make, in my example, program changes or you need
to target this community versus another for HIV/AIDS
testing. Data science allows you in a relatively short amount
of time to get answers to questions. And I actually like that
part about it, as opposed to waiting months, years, decades
to answer a question. So that’s the part about it that I enjoy
the most.
And that it’s never the same thing every day. That’s the
other part about it, that on the outside looking in it may
appear to be mundane, but it actually isn’t. You may go in
thinking you’re going to do this set of analysis and then find
that you need to tweak some of your variables or something
like that. So I think the fact that it can be different every day
and that you can get an answer to a question in a relatively
reasonable amount of time is a large part of what I enjoy
about data science.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

29

	  

Kirill:

Fantastic. Very insightful. And I totally agree with you that
it’s very fast and it’s also very interesting in terms of it
changes all the time. And the big question: So, from where
you are—and I think your answer to that is actually going to
be very valuable to lots of our listeners because you’re in a
very different space, you’re in biology or in medicine, and
very few of our guests are operating in that space. So the
question is: From where you are, and from what you’ve seen
about data science, where do you think this field is going?
So, what do you think is coming for the world in terms of
data science and specifically in your profession? And what
would you say listeners need to prepare for to look out for
the future so that they can build their careers in that space
or just be prepared for what’s coming in terms of data and
medicine?

Kimberly:

So, I think one of the bigger, more significant applications of
data science in terms of medicine is that information that is
collected about you on the data side can be used for
anything from collecting genomic data that can be used to
determine which drugs will better treat your cancer, or
coming from HIV, what areas of the county should we be
looking for to see the next outbreak of a certain disease. So I
think in medicine, the sky is the limit in terms of how useful
it can be. And ultimately, with the goal of saving people’s
lives and improving people’s lives who are dealing with
diseases which can many times be fatal. So that’s the
biggest thing that I see data science being able to be used in
the medical space, is that it has an overall goal of improving
care.
I think one of the challenges to data science being applied
heavily in the field of medicine is that oftentimes people are

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

30

	  

reluctant to change, and that there is a big learning curve
with it. I’m seeing that a lot with the implementation of
various EMRs in hospital settings, that there is a learning
curve involved with learning how to properly use an EMR or
EHR to document information in a chart for a patient, but I
think that the overall goal of saving lives and decreasing
health care costs makes it a challenge that’s worth people in
that profession and in that space meeting. So I guess that’s
my comment about medicine and data science. I think the
sky is the limit. I think ultimately it will improve the health
of people and that will ultimately drive costs down. At least
that’s the hope.
Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree with you. Data science can definitely
help with all those areas. And what you mentioned now just
sparked an idea in my mind. I’d really like to get your
opinion on this. What do you think of what’s going on with
data science and the genome and genetics basically? I think
it’s like $1,000 you pay and then you get your whole genome
code and basically they can predict what diseases that you
might have as you age and what diseases you’re most
susceptible to. What’s your opinion on that?

Kimberly:

I think my biggest concern about some of the information
that can be gathered about individuals genomically has to
do with the ethics of how that information is used. One of
my biggest concerns with that in and of itself is that
insurance companies could use it to charge you different
rates for health care insurance. We need to be thinking
about some of the ethical implications of some of these
technologies before they become a problem. I think that we
tend to—to use the country slang—tend to run after the cow
after it’s already left the barn. I think that’s how it goes.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

31

	  

So I think that there probably needs to be some concurrent
conversations held about, “Okay, so we have this
information. We know this person is genetically predisposed
to developing Alzheimer’s. How are we going to use this
information to help people and not to charge them more for
their health care insurance?” That’s the thing I worry about.
That the ethical questions around some of the information
that we’re gathering are not being answered or even
addressed. And I think it could really be huge.
On the other hand, I think that that information could be
useful to people to know, again, what types of drugs might
be better suited based on what their genomic liver profiles
shows, things of that nature. So I think we have to be
careful to address some of these ethical and legal concerns
before we get too far ahead of ourselves in the science.
Kirill:

So, like, on a community basis, it’s the ethics that are a bit
concerning that need to be addressed. But on an individual
basis, like just for an individual person or somebody
listening to this podcast, you think it’s not a hoax. If they
have the finances to do this and they’re interested, then they
can go and just get this genome done and you think that can
add value to their lives.

Kimberly:

Absolutely. The only thing I would caution is that you speak
maybe to a genetic counsellor because you may find out
things you might not want to know. You might not want to
know that you’re going to be bald by the time you’re thirty.
That could be problematic for some folks. Obviously, I’m
being facetious with that example, but I would certainly
caution the ethics and also some counselling if you know
that you have a genetic predisposition to certain serious
medical conditions, you’ll certainly want to seek a genetic

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

32

	  

counsellor to get their take on what the results mean and
what they would mean for your life.
Kirill:

Yeah, fantastic. I actually want to do one of those. I don’t
think they offer them in Australia, so the next time I’m in the
U.S. I’ll get one of those done. It sounds very interesting to
find that out. That’s good advice, as well, to get a counsellor
so you’re not just reading these results on your own and
getting all depressed. You actually have somebody guiding
you through this and helping you acknowledge what you’re
seeing in that paper.

Kimberly:

Exactly.

Kirill:

Okay. Thank you so much for coming on the show. It’s been
a very unique episode, speaking of data science and health.
And if any of our listeners would like to follow your career or
learn more about your PhD and read your research papers,
what would you say the best way or ways is to contact you
or just follow you?

Kimberly:

So, I’m actually on LinkedIn. I pretty much accept
invitations from all positive people, especially in data
science. It’s been a really interesting way to connect with
different people and how they’ve applied the field of data
science to their individual careers. I’m also on Twitter,
having recently found it and it has now become somewhat of
an obsession, at the Twitter handle @DataKimist to combine
my love of data and my name, a take on my name, I’m also
formally trained as a chemist – shout-out to UNC Chapel
Hill. Yeah, so that’s where I can be found. Either on
LinkedIn – Kimberly Deas, or I’m on Twitter @DataKimist.

Kirill:

Wonderful. We’ll include those in the show notes. And for all
of you out there who use Twitter, definitely follow Kimberly

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

33

	  

on @DataKimist. I’m sure you’re up for some very interesting
and insightful shares that she’ll be doing. And one final
question I have for you today, Kimberly: What is your one
favourite book that you can recommend to our listeners that
will help them become better at data science?
Kimberly:

You know, I thought about this question a lot. I found the
O’Reilly series of books on R programming and Python to be
extremely helpful. When I was initially going into the field, or
contemplating, the series of books – “Bioinformatics for
Dummies,” “Python for Dummies,” “C++ for Dummies” –
those were initially very helpful. I think that the thing about
data science and data analytics is that there’s not any one
book, or at least I haven’t found one, that kind of
encompasses everything, because it can on a certainly level
be a very broad field. But in terms of how I got into it and
books that I found useful, breaking it down into the
language that I could understand, I would definitely say the
O’Reilly books and the series that are written for dummies.

Kirill:

Gotcha. So we’ve got the O’Reilly series on R programming
and Python programming and the series “…for Dummies”
books on different programming languages such as C, C++,
and so on. Thank you so much, Kimberly, for coming on the
show. It’s been a great pleasure having you on and I’ve
definitely learned a lot from the insights that you’ve shared.

Kimberly:

Great. Thank you for having me. And thank you for being a
fantastic instructor in R and Tableau.
(background music plays)

Kirill:

Thank you. It’s my pleasure. Bye.

Kimberly:

Bye.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

34

	  

Kirill:

So there you have it. I hope you enjoyed the today’s show.
And personally, my favourite part was when we talked about
where the field of medicine is going hand in hand with the
field of data science. I always find it very exciting to talk
about how medicine is evolving, how rapidly it’s evolving and
where it’s going. And that discussion about genomes and
how data science is used to generally help people better
understand what diseases they might be susceptible to,
what medicine might be more efficient for them, I think
that’s a very exciting space. I think that’s a future of us as a
human race and it’s always interesting to get people’s
opinions on it, especially when people are actually in that
field. So I really enjoyed that part of the discussion, and I
hope you did too.
I hope you enjoyed lots of takeaways from today’s episode.
And if you’d like to get the show notes and links to all the
resources from this episode, then head on over to
www.superdatascience.com/25 and there you’ll find the
transcript, links to resources and also links to Kimberly’s
social media where you can go ahead and follow her and find
out how her career evolves in the future. So make sure to
connect with Kimberly. And finally, if you’re listening to this
podcast on iTunes, I’d really appreciate if you could click
that button and rate this podcast and give us an amount of
stars that you think we deserve. That would be great help for
us. And on that note, I can’t wait to see you next time. Until
then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/25

35

