	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 24
FIVE MINUTE
FRIDAY:
“WHAT ARE YOU
PASSIONATE
ABOUT?”
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/24

1

	  

Kirill:

This is Five Minute Friday episode number 24, and what are
you passionate about?
I was listening to a show with Joshua Fields Millburn in it
just recently, and if you don't know Joshua, he's got a
website called theminimalists.com. And this is a person who
tries to live minimalistically. So he throws away as many
things as he possibly can, keeps as little things as possible
in his home, and just owns as many things as he needs. And
he's got this website, theminimalists.com, and he was
talking on one of these shows about his life and about what
he practices, this whole minimalistic lifestyle, very
interesting. So I highly recommend checking out his website.
But the thing that struck me in this show was his approach
to meeting new people. So when you meet somebody new, or
when you interact with somebody and you want to find out
more about them, what do you normally say? You normally
say after you exchange names and just say hello, you
normally say "What do you do?" You want to find out what
the person does for a living, what they do for work, what
their career is about, and so on. And the same thing for
other people. You've probably been asked his question
millions of times, what do you do? And you already have a
certain response that you usually respond with.
And Joshua came up with this idea of replacing "What do
you do?" with "What are you passionate about?" And I found
that very interesting. And his comment to that when we ask
"What do you do?", we are kind of inherently comparing
ourselves to others. We're trying to assess where this person
we are speaking with is placed on the social-economic scale.
So as cynical as it might sound, depending on the answer of
the person, whether you like it or not, your brain already

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/24

2

	  

processes, tries to guess how much that person earns, what
their aspirations are, maybe even how old they are, how long
they've been doing what they have been doing, how
influential they are, what kind of -- again, this might sound
cynical, but whether you like it or not, you start thinking
about how this person can help you in your life and whether
this is a useful connection or not.
But when you ask the question, "What are you passionate
about?", the conversation has a completely different
perspective. So the person might be doing one thing, but
they're passionate completely about something else. And
they might still be doing what they're passionate about, it
just might be a hobby, or it might be philanthropy that
they're doing, or it might be something that they're doing in
their free time, or it actually might even be what they're
doing at work.
But when you talk about people's passion, rather than what
they're tied up in doing, people tend to be much more
excited in talking about it, and as Joshua put it, the
conversation becomes much richer. And you get to connect
on a much deeper level, and that way you're more likely to
find people that not just do the same thing as you do, but
who are passionate about similar things to you. And that is
a much more inspiring thing to talk about and to connect
upon.
So there you go, next time you are talking to somebody, try
instead of asking "What do you do?", try asking them "What
are you passionate about?" and see what the response will
be and see how much better or not you'll be able to connect
with that person. And hope you enjoyed today's quick
inspirational note. Go ahead and practice that on the
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/24

3

	  

weekend. Hope you have a fantastic time. Connect with
people around you. Connect with your family, friends, and I
can't wait to see you and hear you back here next time. And
until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/24

4

