	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 19
WITH
OT RATSAPHONG

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

1

	  

Kirill:

This is episode number 19, with Business Analyst Ot
Ratsaphong.
(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Hello and welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. Today
I’ve got a very interesting guest joining me for the show. Ot
Ratsaphong is a Business Analyst in the Australian
Department of Veteran Affairs. And what is interesting about
Ot is that he has been working in the space of data science
in the Australian government for many, many years. And
he's changed different departments, changed different roles,
but throughout his career, he's some how mostly stayed
with the government departments performing business
analytics roles.
So in this podcast, Ot will share some insights on how the
government uses data and data science to perform and to
deliver the best services to its customers, which are the
citizens of a country. I personally learned quite a lot about
how the government operates and what career opportunities
exist in the government, and I think you will too.
And also in this podcast, we discuss something that we've
touched on previously in episode 11 with Garth Zoller, how
right brain people go about data science. And in this

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

2

	  

podcast, you will actually learn a huge advantage that right
brain people have when it comes to data science and
thinking about data science problems.
So I can't wait for you to check all of that out in today's
show. And without further ado, I bring to you Ot, Business
Analyst at the Department of Veteran Affairs.
(background music plays)
Hello everybody, and welcome to the SuperDataScience
podcast. Today I’ve got a very interesting guest with me here
on the show, Ot Rataphong calling in from Canberra,
Australia. How are you today, Ot?
Ot:

I'm great, thanks Kirill!

Kirill:

Thank you very much for coming on the show and how is
the weather there in Canberra right now?

Ot:

At the moment, very hot and muggy. And thank you for
having me on the podcast.

Kirill:

Oh, it's my pleasure. All right yeah, so it's great to have you.
And we actually had a quick chat with Ot before the podcast
and Ot's really interesting, he's got an interesting
background in art and we had a bit of a chat in French and
practiced that a little bit. And yeah, so we've got quite a lot
to talk about. And right away I want to mention a quick
disclaimer. So Ot is involved in government work, he's
worked in the Tax Office of Australia, and the Immigration
Office, and he currently works in the Department of Veteran
Affairs.
And therefore, throughout this podcast, there will be a lot of
moments where due to security level clearances, Ot cannot
mention some things and go into a lot of detail. So you'll

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

3

	  

have to forgive us for these omissions. But at the same time,
we're going to hopefully have a wonderful chat about how
government approaches data science and thinks about data
science, and then some of Ot's background, and maybe a
couple of other things that Ot has been involved in and has
been using data science for.
So are you ready for this Ot?
Ot:

Oh yeah!

Kirill:

All right. Ok. Let's get started. So first of all, very interesting
is where you currently work. Could you tell our listeners a
bit more about your current government facility that you
work in?

Ot:

Ok, currently I'm working at the Department of Veterans
Affairs. What I do, I'm working as a Business Analyst and
I'm involved in upgrading one of their systems, which is
involved with looking after the psychological Veterans and
Family Counselling Services. When I got that position
recently, I found it very interesting because I wanted to get
into that data science and one of my interests was health,
mental health. So I was looking forward to seeing how I
could get myself involved in that field.
But at the moment, I'm not currently looking at any client
data because there's a lot of privacy issues that the
Department outsources and then studies in relation to
mental health and psychology to elite university studies.

Kirill:

Interesting. So you're helping them upgrade a system. So
you've been through a couple of government departments
throughout your career. What has driven this choice? Why
have you always chosen to stay inside the government sector

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

4

	  

rather than go into the industry or into consulting maybe?
What attracts you in working for the government?
Ot:

Well I started my IT career when I -- actually, it's a funny
story. After I graduated from art school, I was looking for a
job and a friend from university, I met up with him, and he
was working at the Tax Office. And he said to me, "Ah, you
know, you should come and join the Tax Office, because
they're looking for graduates, and then they can send you to
study further if you want to." And that was an attraction to
me. And this friend, he studied Botany. He did [inaudible] in
Botany, but he was studying Law. And so he did a complete
shift. I thought, "Ok, Tax Office." [inaudible] And I thought it
was a good opportunity to get a job with the government,
and then they pay for a free education. So that was my
attraction.

Kirill:

Yeah, ok. And why did you stay?

Ot:

Well, I wanted to get into IT. And at that time, there was a
shortage of IT people, and they were prepared to train. And
they said, look, if you come to Canberra, we'll train you. So
that was the attraction, and that's how I ended up in
Canberra. There was a lot of on-the-job training, I could go
to university and they'd pay my university fees. And so that
was the attraction. And so I moved my family and all that,
and we just ended up staying here.

Kirill:

Ok, all right.

Ot:

Things like school, and this and that. Yeah.

Kirill:

Yeah. And in Canberra, just for those of our listeners who
might not be totally familiar with the Australian geography,
it's a common misconception that Sydney is the capital of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

5

	  

Australia. Sydney is actually just the biggest city, and
probably the financial capital. But actually the capital of
Australia is Canberra. And so from your story, I'm gathering
that there's a lot of government departments located in
Canberra; it's quite easy to find a government job in that
city. Is that correct?
Ot:

Yeah. So most of the work initially was government work.
But now, Canberra has grown and is changing. So there's a
50-50 split. There's a lot of work that's outsourced now, and
so there's consultants and oil, and there's lots of
construction and commercial, and lots of other work
involved in Canberra. There's still a lot of work in IT, there's
a lot of work. It's mainly government work.

Kirill:

Yeah, that’s quite a big split, 50:50. Even if it’s quite
approximate, that’s a lot of government jobs. Okay, but
obviously, even though at the time it was probably easy or
more common to get a government job in Canberra, is there
something that specifically attracts you about government
work? Is it some benefits or is it the approach, the culture in
the workplace? Is there anything that you can pinpoint?

Ot:

In government work there’s so much work to do that you can
never get bored. (laughs) It’s like working on a big farm.
There’s lots of work to do and there are lots of projects. And
from an IT perspective -- I guess, listening to your podcast,
when you worked in Deloitte’s, you were saying that there is
lots of work, you know, a variety of work. And in the same
way, in the government work, there’s so much variety as
well. So you could move from one project to another
depending on whatever you’re interested in. I’ve worked in
my early days in distributed computing, so I got to travel a
lot. I visited a lot of Australia because I had to go and set up

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

6

	  

computers and set up systems for different government
departments.
I moved to Defence and worked there and I got to set up lots
of systems all around all of the bases around Australia. I did
a lot of travel, so it’s very nice.
Kirill:

Okay. One thing that we’re definitely not going to talk about
on this podcast is the systems you set up for the
Department of Defence. That will get this podcast shut
down. (Laughs) So we will stick to the Department of Veteran
Affairs and just your overall experience with government. My
question, not that I wonder about it every single day, but
whenever it comes to government and data science, the
question that I normally have is, when you’re a company
and you’re out there competing with other companies in
your same space, you’re forced to use data science.
If you think about it, there’s two companies – A and B – they
do exactly the same thing and they have the same products
and services, but one of them uses data science to its
advantage in operations and marketing and so on, and the
other one doesn’t. Of course, company A, the one that uses
data science will overcome company B and have this huge
competitive edge.
On the other hand, government doesn’t really compete with
anybody. Government creates the rules. Government has to
exist. You cannot outcompete government because it just
has to be there. So they don’t have this pressing need to be
on the cutting edge of data science, have the latest
technology, implement the latest systems and so on. And yet
here you are telling us that you are helping the government

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

7

	  

implement systems
capabilities.

to

improve

their

data

analytics

And I’ve also heard that Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology
bought a supercomputer for their predictions, and so on. So
there are signals indicating that the government is investing
into data science. It does recognize the value. So having you
on the podcast here is very valuable because you can
provide your impression, without going into any additional
details that you cannot disclose, but just your impression of
does the government use data science, does the government
think of data science as this new technology or new area or
field that it needs to implement?
Ot:

Yeah, okay. I think what came to mind when you were
talking about this is there’s a government department that is
charged with ensuring that all government departments
provide online access. And there’s an on-going work in all
departments to migrate a lot of their systems to provide
online access to government services. And even though the
government departments don’t have anyone to compete with,
there is this overarching government policy, I guess, to do
more with less. (Laughs)

Kirill:

OK.

Ot:

Yeah, there is a lot of work being done to make the most out
of taxpayers’ money. Governments are always looking to be
efficient. In terms of data science, they’re looking at—I better
not talk about the other departments that I’ve worked with
before, but there are two things: how to make government
services more accessible, easier and, for example, in
Veterans’ Affairs, many of the veterans are aging, they’re
retired and they want to travel. You know, like what they call

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

8

	  

the “grey nomads”. They don’t want to come into the office to
make a claim so we provide online access to them. They
could be anywhere. So they can just log in through their
laptops or their iPhones, iPads or the mobile devices and
just to provide any inquiries they want, they can just do it
online. That’s a big saving for the department and it’s a
really good service for the clients, for the veterans.
Kirill:

Okay. I see what you’re saying. So basically it’s not the
competition that drives governments to use and implement
data science and new systems and so on, but it’s actually
the consumers, it’s actually the expectations that people
now have because all the other companies that we deal with,
whether it’s banks or shops and so on, they have these
online systems, and we’re used to, as consumers, to be able
to access and make claims online. And therefore, the
government needs to keep up with our expectations and
therefore it provides a great service and also it significantly
reduces its own operational cost. Is that a good summary of
what we just talked about?

Ot:

That’s right.

Kirill:

Okay.

Ot:

I think Australia is in the forefront in the world in terms of
government providing online services. Even in America, a lot
of government services are very disjointed because of the
government structure. Even in England as well, a lot of
people -- I heard people being in long queues just to pay
their bills, to get government access and all that. Things
might be changing now, but the government works with a lot
of corporations, joint venture type things to develop services

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

9

	  

and they can then export these services to other countries as
well.
Kirill:

That’s very interesting. Yeah, I will kind of agree and
disagree on the online stuff. Like, I’ve personally had
experiences in Australia where I had to go and I couldn’t do
something online, like make a health claim or something. I
had to actually physically go. But hopefully, that will
improve with time. It’s not everywhere. You can submit your
tax online and things like that, so that’s good. Compared to
other countries, I don’t know about the experience, because
I’m not a U.S. citizen and I can’t comment on that, but I’ve
seen a couple of websites that some of the U.S. departments
have for their customers. And the new website that the
Australian government has rolled out, which is
mygov.com.au, that is like miles ahead of everybody else. I
really like the versatility and usefulness of that website. So I
will agree with you on that point.

Ot:

I did work on myGov at some point but, you know, in terms
of making it easy for business to do business, I think the tax
office has done a really good job on that.

Kirill:

Yeah, I agree with you on that. That’s also true. Okay, so
that’s been a good kind of summary of government and how
they use data science. One thing I was curious about, and
probably a lot of our listeners will have the same question, is
very often in government, we come across bureaucracy. And
a lot of people have this negative impression, or there’s a
negative connotation, around this whole concept and the
word “bureaucracy” has this whole negative connotation to
it, that whenever you need something done, or even inside
the government, the government wants to change
something, and going through a change, there’s a lot of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

10

	  

paperwork that it has to go through. So being somebody who
works in the government, and obviously you see this from a
different lens. What would your comment be on that? Like,
why does it exist, and is it really necessary? Is there a
justification to all of that lengthy paperwork and processing
that sometimes has to be put in place?
Ot:

Yeah. Whenever the government needs to implement a new
system or undertake a new project, a submission has to be
made for funding through the department. Department then
makes a submission through Parliament to get funding. So
as the public servants could work in the government, we
need to be really aware that we need to report how we’re
spending the money. Because if we are not spending it
properly and it gets out that the proper checks and balances
haven’t been done, then it’s very bad publicity for the
company. So we have to be really careful. We’re trying to
make business balance so we’re trying to get work done, but
also trying to make sure that at the end of the project, that
we can say that we’ve done it properly, that we haven’t done
anything wrong. Because everything needs to be
documented and archived, and there’s a 99-year time chain
for all documentation. At some point in time, you can go to
the government archives and do any research you want. You
could submit freedom of information and find out how
things have been done.

Kirill:

Yeah, that’s interesting.

Ot:

Everything is public, so we’re making sure we look after
public money really. It’s not our money, it’s public money.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

11

	  

Kirill:

And it’s not just money. It’s also the data, right? The
government deals with all this sensitive information from the
public.

Ot:

Yeah. The data is even more important. I can say that when
I was working in the tax office, there was what we call an
“air gap” between outside systems and internal systems just
to make sure that there is no possibility of having [inaudible
20:38] lots of privacy issues.

Kirill:

Yeah. I can imagine that. Because this is a careers podcast, I
would like to ask you a question about—for those of our
listeners who are looking to start a career, or maybe make a
move in their career into data science specifically in
government-related work, what would you say the number
one thing is that they should look out for? What would you
say they should be prepared for, or research or get
themselves ready for going into this step in their career of
working for the government in the space of data science?

Ot:

As I mentioned before, I started my career as a developer,
and my main focus – a lot of my main focus was in data
transfers, being able to analyse data and understanding
data. You need to be good at data analysis. That’s your
starting point, and then obviously with data science, how to
manipulate data. I was talking to a couple of colleagues early
on who are doing data science, and a lot of the work is data
collection. You know, as we’ve heard before, in data science,
data collection, data manipulation, cleaning data, a lot of
work is searching for data. Because there is a lot of data, but
it’s sort of in all the different government departments. And I
was thinking about the talk today, I think the big thing that
I think will be the main thing for data scientists going
forward is unsupervised learning, having that ability to get

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

12

	  

understanding of how unsupervised learning works and
being able to set up a system that can collect data,
categorize it and then analyse it, and then go forward.
They’re the skills that you need.
In Canberra, we have a couple of data science meet-ups that
I’m in. Different people are doing different things. A lot of
work will be done in text analysis. There’s a lot of legislation.
Different departments do different things. For example, in
health, we have a lot of health-related data: how government
departments – how the health department — how much
spending is done in terms of what medicine, what
treatments, what drugs, what illnesses. There’s a heap of
data to be analysed to come up with how to efficiently make
use of government funding. Government is about how to
best make use of government spending, make the most out
of the tax dollars that they collect. I did a project in health
and we had to analyse data related to spending. When you
go to a hospital, there is a treatment package that includes
say, surgery, drugs, etc. The government collects all that
because that all goes to MediCare. There is work being done
there. So for somebody who is interested in government
work as a data scientist, you need to be flexible about what
work is there and to understand what the government
department is interested in doing.
And teamwork is a big thing. That’s a key thing. If you go for
an interview, they’re always looking for people who can work
with other people. (laughs) And that is not related to data
science, but in a data science it’s a multi-discipline, isn’t it?
You have to work programmers, data analysts and
everything like that. People skills are important as much as
your technical skills.
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

13

	  

Kirill:

All right, thank you. I like that comment that unsupervised
learning is going to take a major role in government's data
science work going forward because indeed, when you think
about it, there are so many different departments in any
government, and they’re all interlinked, and sometimes
information needs to be gathered from all different locations.
So unsupervised learning, where the algorithm can come
with predictions without having some input set of rules,
input learning structure, that can be a very valuable
addition to government analysis in the space of data.
But what I did also like is your comment about teamwork.
Indeed, it’s not directly related to data science, but when you
think about it, data scientists can be different. And
personally, I like to work in teams. But oftentimes, I find
myself secluded, I find myself just working on my own
project and driving the project. I’m very passionate about
taking one thing and going forward with it. Still, people skills
are important. You do need to get information from different
places, and from different parts of the organization, so you
need to know how to speak with people anyway. But
sometimes there are projects where you don’t need to work
in a team of data scientists to get to a final result when it’s
like a one-man job.
Whereas from your comments it made me think that
probably in government, that is a rarer case. Where in
government it’s more, because of all of these regulatory
frameworks, because of the compliance procedures, because
of all the Q and A that has to happen, because of all the
sensitive information, like one person cannot have access to
everything and cannot do the whole project on their own, I’m
kind of thinking that probably is the case in government,

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

14

	  

that you would find yourself more commonly working in
teams of analysts or data scientists, rather than being able
to take a project and just spearhead it on your own and get
the final result. Is that fair?
Ot:

This is a good point because this is what will give you insight
into government work. I work with some senior managers
who have specialized knowledge of their domain. And then
as well as that, we have policy people who have specialized
knowledge about the government policy involved. And as
well as that, we have then the subject matter experts who
are at the coal face, who would meet and talk to people, or
provide support to end users. And that’s another level of
teamwork.
Then there’s the IT people you have to deal with. If your
system needs support, or you need to interface with a
different government department, then you need to be able
to talk to those people and be on good terms and have an
understanding of what kind of data you need to transfer
between your department and the other government
department. You need to understand security issues and
make sure that all those checks and balances are in place.
So you need to be a bit of a jack of all trades in terms of
being able to talk to people, as well as knowing what you can
offer in terms of your skillset.

Kirill:

Yeah, that was a great summary. I think, for a lot of our
listeners out there, and I hope that for a lot of our listeners
out there, this little conversation about government debunks
some of those myths that you might have preconceived
about working in government, that maybe it’s boring, that a
lot of the stuff is just mundane or routine. From what Ot has
described, it doesn’t sound like that at all. In fact, on the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

15

	  

contrary, when you have to work with lots of different
people, you have to constantly be ready to work inside a
team. You’re servicing this whole population, so it’s a very
responsible type of work.
The only thing you have to be prepared for is some specifics,
I guess, that are a bit different from working in the industry.
And one of them we outlined here in the podcast, is that you
have to really be a team player. Some people are more of a
team player, some people are less of a team player. Probably
think about that, and maybe there’s some other specifics
which we probably won’t go into detail right now, but it gives
you a good kind of perception of which way to keep looking
to understand if government is a good choice for you as a
career.
Ot:

Yeah, and if you’re interested in a particular area, you know,
there are opportunities. You have to be more proactive about
pushing your perspective on what you can do and what you
can offer to the government department. It takes a bit of
time, I suppose. I mean, I’m personally still new to data
science, but I’ve sort of been able to manoeuvre myself to
areas which may require data science type work. At this
current project, not so much, but you sort of build up your
case in terms of what you can do, and eventually people find
out what you can do and then you get to the jobs where
there’s more data science work.

Kirill:

Oh, yeah. That’s a great advantage that you just outlined.
That because of the vast size of government, and the amount
of different departments—like, you’ve moved through three
different departments.

Ot:

Oh, lots more.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

16

	  

Kirill:

Lots more. There you go. So would you say it was—not easy,
but it wasn’t as complex as going on and finding a new job?

Ot:

No. No.

Kirill:

Exactly. Once you get into government, and if you find that
you have a valuable skillset to offer, but it’s not exactly right
for the position where you’re currently in, or you start
exploring new skills, you’ve grown, you’ve developed, it’s very
easy, from what I understand from Ot’s comments, to jump
around to find the right place for you. And the government
knows — they want to keep talented people inside this
massive customer-facing organization which is the
government. So there you go, that’s a huge advantage, that
you will find the right place for your skills.

Ot:

There’s definitely some work in Canberra in the data science
area. You just need to be patient and keep networking, so
that you have meet-ups, you talk to people, learn from each
other. And we’ve got some really good field data scientists I
can learn from. I’ve been to a couple of meet-ups and I’m
just amazed by the talent that we have in Canberra.

Kirill:

Yeah. Okay, thank you very much. That has been a great
overview of government, and hopefully, our listeners have
picked up quite a lot of stuff from there. Now we’re going to
move on to a different topic. I’m going to do something that I
haven’t done before. We’ve got two very interesting topics
outlined, and I’ll give Ot a chance to choose which one he
wants to talk about more because we probably won’t have
enough time to cover both. Topic number one is that Ot has
a very interesting background. He’s actually got two arts
degrees, so let’s just look into LinkedIn here. So you’ve
completed a Bachelor of Arts in French, Economics and

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

17

	  

Environmental Studies, and you’ve also got a Bachelor of
Visual Arts in Sculpture, Photography and Painting. So a
very right-brained person going into data science, and we
can talk about that and your experience. Or, as you
mentioned before we started the podcast, you have a passion
for trading. So you use data science in trading options and
that is also a very interesting field. We can also talk about
that. What would you prefer to talk about, Ot?
Ot:

They’re both related, so I’ll try and combine them.

Kirill:

Okay.

Ot:

You want me to start now?

Kirill:

Yes, yes, please.

Ot:

Okay. So when I was studying art, what happened was the
question as an art student was how does the audience, the
viewer, look at a painting and the interaction between this
piece of canvas with a bit of pigment and painting. And
where's this meaning – how do you get meaning and joy from
it, especially when you are talking about abstract art. So
that was the question for me at the time. And then
computers came along, and then we became interested in
user interfaces. And then that was another question, "Okay,
so we’re moving from canvas to the screen." And then
computers became intelligent, and they can play chess. So
we’re not dealing with inanimate objects anymore. We’re
dealing with something that has a semblance of intelligence.
And so that drew me to the computer and artificial
intelligence field. So as an art student and also as an
economist, I was interested in how society works, especially
how the financial—you know, how does society hang

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

18

	  

together? And that led me to the stock market because that’s
where the rubber meets the road. (laughs) At that time, I
happened to be working in the tax office and one of my
colleagues had done a Masters in artificial intelligence with
regards to weather prediction, and he was doing neural
networks and all that. That was about in the year 2000. The
neural networks are fairly new.
Kirill:

Very new back then.

Ot:

Very new. And I asked to see his notes, and the notes were –
I just couldn’t make sense, head or tail of it. And there
wasn’t a lot of work. You know, at that time, what he was
trying to pitch was to use neural networks and artificial
intelligence to detect fraud.

Kirill:

Which is a huge industry right now, yes?

Ot:

Yeah, yeah, especially tax fraud. And he was going to submit
a sort of publication or project proposal. But I was interested
in how to use artificial intelligence in the stock market, the
direction of the stock market. But at that time, I knew
virtually nothing about the stock market. I had done a
couple courses on options trading. I chose options trading
because I didn’t have a lot of money, and options trading
was the only thing that made sense for someone who didn’t
have a lot of money.

Kirill:

Why is that?

Ot:

Because of the leverage factor. So, I had to drop the artificial
intelligence and concentrate on learning the business of
trading. And then fast-forward to now, suddenly machine
learning is around, and it piqued my interest again. I have
been interested in Python and all that, and I started digging

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

19

	  

around algorithmic trading, and there’s a couple of websites
that talk about that. And that’s how I moved from art to
artificial intelligence to trading. So they’re related in a way.
(Laughs)
Kirill:

Very interesting. So even though they’re very different, the
way you think about them, they’re actually very related.

Ot:

Yeah. They are related. And coming from the right brain
perspective, the way I look at the market is to try and find
relationships between different things that drive the market.
For example, people look at the open high, low close, and all
that, but things have moved on from that. Like, you can’t
beat that anymore. And now people are looking at satellite
pictures and going back to the original source of the
business to see how the businesses might be working based
on the number of cars in the car park.

Kirill:

I haven’t heard that one before. That is amazing.

Ot:

You haven’t heard that? Well, there is a company that takes
photos from satellites, and there is this group that analyses
the number of cars in the car park of Wal-Mart. And then
they can work out how well or how not so well Wal-Mart
prices will be based on the daily number of cars in the car
park. Or something like that!

Kirill:

That is on the verge of insider trading.

Ot:

It’s like you have to be—you have to really look naturally.
You can’t just dig deeper. You have to dig different holes. So,
to be competitive we have to look at different relationships
that may not seem related, and that’s where the human
mind is better. Machines can do that, but you’ve got to point
them in certain directions. You know, I do a lot of thinking

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

20

	  

about this and I’m sure other data scientists do that. But
coming from humanities or arts point of view — you were
talking about it in your podcast: Which one is better, Python
or R, in a different podcast. I started looking at Python, and I
knew nothing about R, but my curiosity made me think “I
need to look at this.” Having learned R, I think “Gee, this is
much better for quick data analysis, just to get the initial
picture of things.” And so I’m doing a lot of exploration with
R at the moment, learning a lot of R, because I think a lot of
the initial data scientists are tending to use R to just get the
initial insight, and then if they need to dig deeper, then they
might go into Python which is more general purpose
language.
Kirill:

Yeah. Okay, that’s an interesting comment about R/Python.
And I really liked your example of thinking laterally when
doing data science. And I agree, machines probably can’t do
that – not just yet.

Ot:

Not yet.

Kirill:

Not yet. With time probably, but right now that is an
advantage of humans. It’s funny, because this conversation
has for the first time ever, I think, made me think in the
reverse way. Usually you think, “Okay, data science. So
people with a left brain perspective, with a left brain way of
thinking, they have an advantage because they have
probably studied something related to that, they’re
statistically better at math, they like stats and enjoy that
kind of stuff more.” And usually my question to a right brain
person is, “How do you catch up on that? What do you do to
kind of make up for that—?”

Ot:

That lack of a technical—

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

21

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, exactly. But with you, it made me think the other way.
It made me think that somebody with a right brain has an
advantage over somebody with a left brain in the sense that
you’re better at thinking laterally. You’ve studied arts, you’ve
studied photography, sculpture, painting and all these other
things that have helped you develop those skills of thinking
non-traditionally about problems. And so now my question
to you is: How does somebody with a left brain make up for
that? How does somebody with a left brain improve
themselves to think laterally better?

Ot:

My facetious answer would be to work with somebody with a
right brain. You know, there’s this thing called STEM, right?

Kirill:

Yeah, yeah.
Mathematics.

Ot:

Yeah. Now there’s this new one called STEAM.

Kirill:

STEAM? Arts? They put Arts in it?

Ot:

A is the Arts, yeah.

Kirill:

Yay! Good. Finally!

Ot:

So, people are moving from STEM to STEAM. They’re
recognizing the value of arts education. I’m a big proponent
of arts education. My first degree was to learn how to learn.
Yeah, what I learned from my first degree was how to learn.
So I can learn anything if I put my mind to it. And then my
second degree was learning how to survive and how to make
use of what you’ve got. As an art student, we learned just to
make do with found objects. You know, there’s artists who
used to make art with found objects. So putting these two
together and looking at say, the stock market, I said, “Okay,
what do I want to do and what do I need to get to where I

Science,

Technology,

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

Engineering

and

22

	  

want to be?” And using my skill of learning to learn, I just
learned what I needed to learn. So using this tool I believe I
can apply myself to just about anything. For example, one of
my interests that we talked about is vegetarian food. And my
latest interest is in brewing and microbes and—
Kirill:

Brewing beer?

Ot:

Brewing beer, brewing cider.

Kirill:

At home? Illegally?

Ot:

At home. Yeah, just brewing—

Kirill:

Not illegally, right? It’s just for yourself?

Ot:

Just for yourself. You’re allowed to brew alcohol in Australia
for self-consumption. If you want to sell it, you need a
license.

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha.

Ot:

But as well as brewing alcohol, there’s brewing – not brewing
– preserving and using the bacteria, good bacteria, probiotic
bacteria. So one of my other areas is researching that kind
of thing.

Kirill:

No, I completely agree with that. It’s a very interesting notion
of learning how to learn. I think my degree largely was about
that as well. It wasn’t about studying physics – it was about
studying physics. But at the end of the day, right now I don’t
use the quantum mechanics or the laser physics that I
learned. But it really helped me understand how to learn
very difficult concepts when the need arises. That kind of
made us steer away a bit from the original question, which
was what does a left brain person that is good at
mathematics, that has been programming all their life, or is

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

23

	  

very into programming and statistics and all these other
things where people with a left brain world perception are
more dominant normally, what does that person do to
develop their right brain, to develop their lateral thinking, to
develop their creative skills now in their current position?
Because now they can’t go back to university and start
studying these things. Is there any suggestions that you can
make, or any recommendations for people with a left brain
to develop these right brain-specific skills? I don’t know, like
start doing pottery, get a hobby or—
Ot:

Yeah, yeah. I was just thinking – just get out there and enjoy
a life a bit more! (Laughs) No, no. I mean, do different things.
For example, when the market crashed in 2008, I took time
off from a lot of that analytical stuff, which was very much
linear, linear analytical stuff. I took time off because the
market was just all over the place. I took a small loss – it
wasn’t a big loss – and I just needed a break.
And so I took up photography. And I thought “I need to get
back to my arts interests,” and then I took up photography
and really just didn’t think about that. I wouldn’t advise
people to break away, but to incorporate a bit more art into
your life. Or even just going to the movies and just
appreciating how a movie is made, for example, and just
looking at movies more from an intellectual appreciation
type of thing. Or read books. A lot of the technical people
that I know read a lot of books – for example,
science/fantasy books. So I’m not sure if I can advise people
that much, because even technical, left brain people have
right brain elements within. It’s just searching for them. One
of my best friends who introduced me to the tax office, he
was a real science geek. He used to read five novels at a

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

24

	  

time. He introduced me to the idea of reading multiple books
at the same time. But then he switched to law. And he
became—you know, he made it to the Bar, and he totally
switched from science to law. I think people can do it. It’s
just – one thing I think helps is to understand society a bit
more, if they’re coming from a pure technical background, is
to understand history. I was watching the “Cosmos” series
recently, you know, the one by Neil deGrasse Tyson. It’s a
more recent series. And I learned about Edmond Halley—
you know Halley’s Comet? You’ve heard of Halley’s Comet?
Kirill:

Yes.

Ot:

Yeah, he was reknown for predicting Halley’s Comet 50 years
before it arrived. And even after he died, [indecipherable
49:52]. But the thing was what I learned here is
understanding history gives you an appreciation of the
bigger picture, of how we fit in. The connection of Haley is
really interesting, because he was the one who sponsored
and published Isaac Newton’s work “Principia Mathematica,”
which today is the foundation for space exploration. During
that time, Isaac Newton was a nobody, an unknown, he was
a recluse, but Halley went and sought him out and asked
him to develop what he knew about gravity. And it’s so
interesting!

Kirill:

Yeah, very interesting.

Ot:

History is really interesting, and I think it just gives you a
bigger picture about the whole how things fit together.

Kirill:

Thank you. That’s a wonderful comment. And yeah, there’s
so much to explore: history, movies, documentaries,
hobbies, all these different areas in addition to your
profession, your data science, your career, you can add into

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

25

	  

your life that will help you develop a different way of
thinking. So thank you very much for that. That’s been a
great overview and I think we’ve had a fantastic chat. And
for those of our listeners who want to contact you or follow
you or somehow follow your career, what would you say the
best way to do that is?
Ot:

The best way is through LinkedIn. That’s my main
professional work channel. In terms of photography, I have a
photography Facebook page on which I occasionally publish
some of my photos. It’s Ot Ratsaphong Photography on
Facebook. Look it up.

Kirill:

Yeah, we’ll definitely include the links to these resources in
the show notes.

Ot:

Yeah, I’m happy to help anyone with any questions relating
to photography.

Kirill:

Yeah, for sure. And if you have any questions relating to
careers, what it’s like working in the government, make sure
to hit up Ot and he’ll share what he can with you. Don’t
expect that he can share everything because of certain
restrictions. And one final question for you, Ot. What is your
one favourite book that can help our listeners become better
data scientists or just better themselves?

Ot:

Better data scientists? I think, as I’m a beginner in data
science, my book that I would go to, which is one interesting
really—there’s a couple of books that I recommend. One is
“The Data Science Handbook” written by Carl Shen, Henry
Wang and William Chen. They interviewed a couple of the
pioneers in data science. I learned from people
[indecipherable 53:05] things together. There’s a bit of
history involved as well in it and that’s a good book.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

26

	  

Another one is called “R for Data Science” by Hadley
Wickham – Hadley Wickham is a key developer in R – as well
as “Advanced R,” another one by Hadley Wickham. Other
than that, another really good book I like has to do with
habits. I forgot the name—
Kirill:

“The Power of Habit”?

Ot:

“The Power of Habit,” yeah.

Kirill:

By Charles Duhigg.

Ot:

Yeah. The thing with that book is developing with habits and
then you can let your subconscious brain do the boring bits
and then you free your conscious mind to think about other
things, more creative things.

Kirill:

There’s some fantastic advice in that book. I agree with you.
I should read it. I’ve read bits and pieces. I should sit down
and read the whole thing.

Ot:

It’s not always easy, but you just keep reading a little bit at a
time. Don’t read it in one sitting.

Kirill:

Yeah, let it sink in. For sure. So I’m just going to recap
those: “The Data Science Handbook”, “R for Data Science”,
“Advanced R” and “The Power of Habits”. There you go. All of
those will be included in the show notes. Thank you very
much Ot, for joining me today on the show. We had a
fantastic chat and you shared some very valuable insights. It
was a great pleasure having you on the show.

Ot:

Thank you, Kirill. Thank you for the opportunity to share
and I hope I’ve been able to help somebody, especially
somebody with a right brain perspective, and helped them,
encouraged them, to explore data science.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

27

	  

Kirill:

Oh, I’m sure you have. Have a great day, thank you and I’ll
talk to you some time soon. Bye.

Ot:

Okay, bye.

Kirill:

Well, there you have it. I hope you enjoyed today’s podcast
and learned a thing or two from Ot who so kindly shared his
insights into two things. We talked about two main things
today. We talked about government and the way government
thinks about data and the way the government, despite it
not being under competitive pressure, still seeks to
implement the latest technologies and methodologies and
ways to use data to serve its customers, the citizens better.
And also we talked about how Ot uses his right brain
mentality to his advantage when it comes to data science.
Personally, for me the main takeaway was the lateral
thinking. That people who study arts and who are more
creative have this advantage that they can think laterally
about business problems. And that example about taking
photos of cars in the car parks of Wal-Mart to understand
how the business is doing is a great illustration of that
concept. So if you are not really a creative person, you don’t
consider yourself to be that creative, well, maybe you’re
wrong, maybe there is a part of you that is creative and you
just need to find it and explore it further. As Ot suggested,
maybe sign up for some hobby or start learning something
about history or pick up a new craft that you haven’t looked
into before and maybe that will help you explore your hidden
talents and that might even help you in your career in data
science.
I hope you enjoyed today’s podcast and as always, you can
find the show notes, including the episode transcript, at

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

28

	  

www.superdatascience.com/19. There we will also share all
of the resources that Ot mentioned, including the books and
the link to his profile and Facebook page with photography
which you totally should go and check out.
And finally, if I can ask you for one thing at the end of the
show, is if you know somebody who is, in your view, more of
a right brain person and might be interested, or is
interested, in getting into the field of data science, then
forward them this podcast to encourage them to get started.
And on that note, I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then, happy analysing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/19

29

