	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 21
WITH
SINAN OZDEMIR

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

1

	  

Kirill:

This is episode number 21, with Data Science Author Sinan
Ozdemir.
(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Hello and welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. I'm
super excited to have you on board, and today we've got a
very special guest. Today we've got Sinan Ozdemir joining us
for the show, and you cannot imagine how many titles this
person holds. So first and foremost, Sinan is the Head Data
Science Instructor at General Assembly in San Francisco. So
General Assembly is a continuing education organization
where after you've done your Bachelors and Masters and
even PhD, you can go and get additional skills that you may
be requiring for your profession. And so Sinan instructs data
science at General Assembly.
But on top of that, Sinan is also the founder and Chief
Technology Officer of Legion Analytics. So it's a technology
startup that intelligently sources leads for businesses based
on previous customer retention. So quite an involved topic,
and he applies data science methods there. And also, Sinan
is an author. He's just published his first book just at the
start of this year, and we'll talk about that and the contents
and you'll get some insights from this book. It's also about
data science. You'll get all that in this show.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

2

	  

So we go into a lot of very interesting topics. We discuss the
topic of AI, so Sinan's got another side project in his
business Legion Analytics, which is called Kylie. Kylie is an
Artificial Intelligence that helps people answer emails. So it's
a very, very interesting topic. And also we go into different
discussions around R versus Python, and why Sinan thinks
that Python is a better option, and what libraries he
recommends. And also we talk about the workflow of data
science projects and the crucial steps in a data science
project.
So all in all, I think you're going to really enjoy this episode.
This is a person with vast experience in the field of data
science and education. So we tried to really deliver some of
value here so that you can walk away with some additional
insights into data science and into how you might want to
structure a career. And on that note, without further ado, I
bring to you Sinan Ozdemir.
(background music plays)
Hello everybody, and welcome to the SuperDataScience
podcast. Today I’ve got a very exciting guest with me, Sinan
Ozdemir, who is an author, a head instructor of data science
at the General Assembly, and the founder of Legion
Analytics. Sinan, welcome to the show. Such a pleasure to
have you on.
Sinan:

Thank you so much for having me. I'm very excited to be
here.

Kirill:

That's awesome. So how're you going today? Where are you
calling from?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

3

	  

Sinan:

I am calling from San Francisco, California. Our day has just
ended and I feel great!

Kirill:

Fantastic. And you probably would, because just recently,
your book has been published and is now available for sale.
So you've just completed your first book, how are you feeling
about that?

Sinan:

It went very well. I spent the better part of 2016 writing this
book, and I'm very happy to say that it is out for purchase
from Packt Publishing, and I hope you all pick up a copy!

Kirill:

Fantastic. I actually ordered my own copy on Amazon just
recently, still waiting to get it in the mail. And I'm just going
to read out a quick sentence from the book description. So
here it says "'Principles of Data Science' is created to help
you join the dots between mathematics, programming, and
business analysis. With this book, you'll feel confident about
asking and answering complex and sophisticated questions.”
So, as I can imagine, you not only have a lot of experience in
the world of data science, but you also have a lot of
experience in the world of education, and you’ve put all of
that into your book. So can you tell us a bit more about
what does your book focus on, and what exactly do you
teach in it?

Sinan:

So the book focuses a lot on the culmination of
mathematics, computer science, and also the application of
data science. I actually come from a background of teaching
oral presentation skills, speech giving, calculus, statistics,
programming, Java and Python. So I come from a very
diverse background in teaching and I wanted this book to
not really focus on anything very specifically, like only math
or only programming, but I wanted to give a more holistic

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

4

	  

view of where data science is, where it’s going and how we
can use data science in our day to day life.
Kirill:

That’s so fantastic. So you’d say that this book is not just for
people who are pursuing a career in data science, it’s also
for people who in any way, shape or form encounter data in
their day to day life. Is that about correct?

Sinan:

That’s exactly right. I wrote this book not only for the
aspiring data scientist, someone who wants to learn the
math and code behind it, but I also wrote it for the managers
of the world. I wrote it for the recent MBAs who just want to
learn more about what it’s going to be like working with a
data team, or working with a data scientist. So it’s really for
anyone who wants to learn more about the field.

Kirill:

That sounds awesome. I can’t wait to get my hands on it.
And definitely, to our listeners out there, definitely check out
this book and order your copy today. So let’s talk a little bit
about you. How did you get into the field of data science?

Sinan:

That’s actually a great question because I think it’s not like
most people’s story. I actually began my professional career
as a graduate student in theoretical mathematics at the
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, MD. I was actually
working on algebraic geometry as well as cryptography. I
had actually heard about a start-up that a friend of mine
was starting and he asked me if I’d like to be their first
intern. I was actually in school at the time, so I joined the
start-up not really knowing how to code but knowing the
math. So they had spent the entire summer teaching me the
code behind everything. For you listeners out there, actually
I was coding in R, for what it’s worth.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

5

	  

And by the end of the summer I actually had fallen in love
with this concept of not only can I apply math theoretically,
but I can apply it with programming languages. And that
really sparked my transition from theoretical math into data
science. From there I taught myself more and more
programing, more and more applications, and about two or
three years later I was finally able to comfortably call myself
a data scientist and the founder of a data science company.
Kirill:

Fantastic! And actually, speaking of your company, it’s
Legion Analytics, the one you’re mentioning, right?

Sinan:

Yes. Yes, it is, Legion Analytics.

Kirill:

What does Legion Analytics do?

Sinan:

Legion Analytics creates a suite of optimization tools for
businesses. So we build an automated sales platform, an
automated communications e-mailing platform and basically
we build products that help make businesses more efficient.

Kirill:

Okay, fantastic. I checked out the website. It’s definitely
something very interesting. Is it like all R-based, or are you
using some other tools inside it?

Sinan:

Actually, I have switched from R to Python, and the site is
built on a Python backend.

Kirill:

Oh, very interesting. Okay. So that raises the million dollar
question, as I like to call it. R versus Python – what are your
thoughts on that?

Sinan:

That is such a good question. And I actually still get asked,
“Why do you teach Python and not R? What is the real
difference?” And I like to answer that question, “Honestly, in
the end it comes down to a preference. And it’s not only your
preference, but the company you work for preference.” The

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

6

	  

reason people like Python so much is because more and
more people are trying to get their feet wet in the field of data
science. And they feel that R is a bit too hard to approach,
and they think Python is much easier to look at, it looks like
normal English. And I think this data alone has made this
large influx in the users of Python because when they were
first starting out they chose the—quote, unquote—easier
language. Now that’s not to say that R is better or worse or
Python is better or worse; it honestly just came down to
“Python seemed easier. I’m going to learn Python.” That
reads into the whole “more people using Python.”
Now, I started out using R because that’s what my
colleagues were using when I was a mathematician. We used
R. And the more and more I needed more general
applications and web development or machine learning or
even visualizations, I found that Python just had a larger
community and a larger third-party base for all the things
that I needed to do.
Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. So the Python story that it’s so popular is kind
of a self-fulfilling prophecy, right? That more people tend to
start with Python because it seems easier and then more
companies start adopting Python because more people know
Python. Like, it self-propels into the world of data science.
Very interesting thoughts on that, yeah.

Sinan:

Exactly. Actually, at General Assembly we used to teach
both R and Python in our data science course. So we would
teach them both concurrently. And the only reason we had
to pick one was because we wanted to teach more material
and less back and forth between R and Python. So the only
reason we chose Python, again, was because most people
who are coming in are beginners. Python is easier to pick up

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

7

	  

than R on average. Now General Assembly teaches only
Python.
Kirill:

Yeah. Okay, very interesting. And moving on to your General
Assembly experience—it feels almost like you’re doing
everything. You’ve got a start-up, you’ve got a book, you’re
teaching in General Assembly. So, moving on to General
Assembly, can you tell us a bit more about them? Because
I’ve heard of General Assembly and I think there’s a branch
in Sydney and they also teach data science there and I think
they also teach other topics. But just for our listeners and
also for me in the sense that I don’t know enough about
General Assembly, can you give us an overview of what
General Assembly is and what is your role in General
Assembly San Francisco?

Sinan:

Absolutely. So General Assembly is an international
continuing education service that provides both in-person
and online curriculum. The curriculum can range anywhere
from data science, data analytics to product management,
web development, frontend/backend design. So it’s actually
a lot of very diverse skills that people need to get into the
workforce. We find that most of our students are actually
looking for a change in career or they’re trying to level up
their career by learning more all the time. My role in General
Assembly, going on for several years now, is not only limited
to the in-person classes that I teach but I’ve also developed
curriculum for their online data science courses. I do a lot of
work with headquarters to develop data science material for
students and companies alike.

Kirill:

Very interesting. So is that limited to just Python
programming or is that like the whole suite of data science

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

8

	  

tools and methodologies and just the philosophy of data
science?
Sinan:

I focus primarily on the Python tools and the philosophy and
the overall workflow of data science. So I talk about
statistical modelling, I talk about metrics and how to
measure metrics and when to measure metrics and things
like that. So it’s not only limited to coding and math, but I
teach a lot of when to use certain models or when not to use
certain models, more importantly.

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, gotcha. So a bit of machine learning—I can
sense a bit of machine learning coming out there. Is that
true?

Sinan:

Of course, yeah. So I do specialize in teaching, at least on
the Python side, I specialize in teaching natural language
processing, machine learning and AI tools. I teach everything
from basic data manipulation using Pandas all the way to
TensorFlow and neural networks and how to practically
apply them and actually create production-ready websites
using TensorFlow.

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, that’s interesting. Because you keep mentioning
there’s a lot of web development involved as well, like
websites and so on, are these tools that you’re teaching, are
they also applicable to people wanting to start their own
business, to people who want to disrupt an industry? Is that
kind of the idea behind it, or is this just for people working
in like Netflix creating a recommender system, or Amazon or
some other place?

Sinan:

It’s definitely a mix. We have students who are coming in
from big companies—you know, Facebook, Google, Tesla—
and they’re looking to bring back to their company a little bit

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

9

	  

more knowledge. But then again you have another subset of
students who are looking to make a completely radical
change in their lives. And just like my book, just like my
company, I believe in this philosophy that data science is
useless unless someone else thinks it’s useful.
Kirill:

Very nice. I like that quote.

Sinan:

So, in my book and in my class, I focus very heavily on the
combination of math, computer science and application. You
can make the most predictive model in the world predicting
cancer or the weather or whatever, but if no one knows how
to use it, no one wants to use it, no one gets to use it it’s
effectively useless. So the web development here is really a
part of the application of data science. You’ve created a
TensorFlow model, you’ve created a scikit-learn model,
whatever you’ve created, now it’s time for you to get it out
there. Let other people use what you’ve built. And a blog
post is so static nowadays that—a blog post doesn’t really
allow a user to utilize or play with your machine learning
model. So we build websites that actually deploy the
machine learning models, that actually let other people use
them for their benefit.

Kirill:

Wow, that’s really interesting. Could you give us an example
of a recent machine learning model that you developed in
that way, that is available for people to play around with?

Sinan:

Sure. So one of my students actually created a great
application where they would take open data about crime
statistics and what they would do is they would actually
scan to see where the user is in San Francisco and what
time it is in San Francisco and effectively lay out a map of

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

10

	  

where the most highest probability chance that a crime will
occur within a half mile radius.
Kirill:

Oh, wow. That’s so cool!

Sinan:

Yeah! And it was great because not only is it an application
of predictive analytics, but it’s a very useful application of
predictive analytics. People actually want to know if “Where I
am is safe at this time of night,” or “Where should I go that
is less likely for a crime to occur?”

Kirill:

Fantastic! Is that available online for us to check out?

Sinan:

You know what, I’d have to check on that because that was
a year ago, and I really hope that this person kept their site
open, and if it is, I’ll give it to you.

Kirill:

Alright, sure. If it’s still available we’ll definitely include it in
the show notes. Yeah, that’s a fantastic application. You
know, it reminds me of that example where some kids in the
UK created this machine learning system that would help
people dispute their fines, their parking fines. And I don’t
remember in which period of time—maybe six months or a
year—he helped people save like £200,000 just through this
online tool that he created using machine learning. Kind of a
similar concept to what you’ve discussed here.

Sinan:

A lot of innovation happens and it takes a very particular
mind-set to create that kind of work.

Kirill:

Yeah. And I like that notion of innovation. I’m sure you
probably talk more about this in your book. What do you
think is the future for innovation in data science? Where do
you think people who want to apply data science, who feel
that there is an opportunity to apply data science somehow,
but they don’t know where or how to get started, what would

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

11

	  

your recommendation for them be to get into this field of
innovation and data science?
Sinan:

Step one: read my book. (Laughs) But seriously, step one:
educate yourself on where data science is at the moment
and what kinds of problems are we tackling. And then once
you’ve done that, there’s actually a fork in the road. The fork
on the left leads to a very innovative side of data science, the
most powerful image recognition software, the most powerful
audio recognition software and satellite imagery and
counterterrorism and all these very, very difficult and very,
very useful applications of data science attempting to be
solved in laboratories by TensorFlow and other deep learning
technologies. That’s one fork.
The other fork actually leads to developing data science tools
for those people who don’t even know they exist. And that’s
actually a part that I take very heavily in my class is, how
can we apply this technology to an industry that doesn’t
even know it exists. How do you take image recognition at its
current state and apply it to a logistics chain or a factory
line or a post office? So how do we take what’s already out
there and apply it to new industries? That’s kind of a two
different ways, I think, that a data scientist can go. Really
pushing the envelope in innovation or taking what’s already
out there and applying it to a field that doesn’t have it yet.

Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. And like prime example of that – Uber, right?
Prime example of using data to change an industry that
existed for decades, the taxi industry. “Let’s just add a
button to our phones to call a taxi.”

Sinan:

Exactly. So Uber is taking kind of both forks in the road and
combining them. They’re taking very envelope-pushing

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

12

	  

technology. You know, self-driving cars, advanced image
recognition, and they’re applying it to a very old industry.
But I would argue that you can do a very similar thing with
technology that has existed for almost a decade. You know,
taking a basic linear regression and applying it to mom and
pop cookie shops, bake shops. And I think that’s where a lot
of the money in the data science field is going to be pouring
in in the next decade or two. It’s not really in the very, very
envelope-pushing innovative software, but “How do we take
what’s already out there and apply it to people who don’t
have it?” And you’re actually already seeing that. For
example, IBM Watson, Facebook and Amazon are just now
releasing their assistants, their AI assistants, and that’s a
very commercial product. It’s not necessarily meant for
CEOs, but it’s meant for students to use them, students in
high school and college to use them. So this whole idea of
democratizing AI and giving it, into the hands of people who
never had it before, that’s where I think a lot of the work will
be done in the coming decades.
Kirill:

Okay, yeah. That’s a very interesting notion that the actual
difference that people who have data science skills—the
difference they can make is not only in the innovation that’s
completely brand new to the world, you know, creating
supercomputers or like artificial intelligence and so on, but
it’s also about taking existing methodologies and just
applying them somewhere else, somewhere to companies
that don’t have it. It kind of reminds me of the situation
where the Internet just came out and first a few companies
had their websites and many companies didn’t. But then
more and more companies started having their websites.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

13

	  

And it wasn’t about creating, you know, pushing the limits
of the Internet. It was about taking companies such as—like
you mentioned, your mom and dad cookie shop—and getting
them up and running with a website, and that made a huge
difference. Those cookie shops that got up and running
earlier, they outsmarted their competitors. And right now
the same thing is happening with machine learning. So I
totally agree with that sentiment.
Sinan:

Yeah. That’s exactly right. I think the ability to give AI into
the hands of people who could not code it themselves, that’s
really going to make a big difference because people who
have ideas but can’t necessarily create or build programs or
software or websites—that doesn’t mean that they don’t get
to have ideas. So giving AI capabilities to these people is
really going to be what’s new in the coming decade.
Our new product at Legion Analytics is called Kylie.AI, and
what Kylie is, is an automatic e-mailer. She’ll actually draft
e-mails for you in your inbox, whether you are a sales
person or not, or a marketer, a customer support person.
And the whole idea is we’ve built a very complex AI system
but we want to give it to you. It’s actually free to sign up and
use Kylie. We want to give it to you so that you have the
ability to see the power of AI and use it for yourself.

Kirill:

That’s a really cool idea. That would help out a lot of people,
especially when you open up your inbox and you have like
hundreds of e-mails. If somebody could draft up your emails for you, how much more efficient would people get and
save so much time. That’s a super cool idea! What else do
you guys have at Legion Analytics?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

14

	  

Sinan:

So our main products actually are automated sales
platforms where we will actually take in your sales
information and automatically recommend and e-mail new
potential customers for your product. So we’ll take in your
existing customers, learn from them and actually
recommend, but not only recommend, but automatically
reach out to them, track their engagements, follow up with
them—again, all automated—and use that information in a
feedback loop that will enhance your sales and make it
better every single day. That’s one of our products, and
Kylie, as I just mentioned, is actually only about two weeks
old. We released Kylie about two weeks ago, and we’ve
already seen a couple hundred signups. And again, it is free
so anyone who wants to sign up on Kylie.AI is more than
welcome.

Kirill:

How do you spell that?

Sinan:

Kylie is K-Y-L-I-E.A-I. Yeah, go ahead and sign up. I’d love to
hear your thoughts on it.

Kirill:

Yeah. So she’s only two weeks old?

Sinan:

She’s only two weeks old, but she is almost a year into
development, so only about two weeks in production, but
about a year’s worth of research.

Kirill:

(Laughs) Well, two weeks old and she can already talk.
That’s pretty fast.

Sinan:

(Laughs) Yeah.

Kirill:

That’s awesome. There you go. That’s AI for you, so guys,
check it out – Kylie.AI. Yeah, that’s a pretty cool concept. So
how did you come up with this idea of Kylie or of all the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

15

	  

other tools that you have inside Legion Analytics? What
prompted you to create this company?
Sinan:

So my co-founder, Jamasen Rodriguez, he was actually a
former salesperson/sales manager of a few companies and
actually a former founder himself, and he had figured out
the problem that sales is very inefficient because you’re only
as good as the person behind the computer. And he thought
that it must be possible to automate some parts of the sales
process. And when he met me—we had both gone to Johns
Hopkins together—we had figured out that yes, we could
automate it. And so what we did was we had actually gone
into the Y Combinator fellowship batch one in California and
we had worked on our automated sales platform –
automated e-mail campaigns, prospecting, CRM tools.
What we had realized was our customers were having a new
problem. We were recommending people, we were reaching
out to them, but then their inbox started filling up with
responses and they wanted a way to better respond to
people. And that actually was the impetus to create Kylie,
the ability to auto-draft and auto-send e-mails for you. So if
you’re getting e-mails every day, about something like “How
much does it cost?” or “When is it released?” or all these
questions about your product, Kylie will look back at your
previous e-mail history, figure out your style and the best
way to write that e-mail and actually respond. So the whole
ability for Kylie to adapt to your personality for every single
user, that’s what we realized was the big problem here and
that’s what we created – an individualistic AI, an AI for
everyone.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

16

	  

Kirill:

That’s really cool. So it’s not just that Kylie uses a
preconfigured set of templates to answer to e-mails. It
actually creates its own text. Is that right?

Sinan:

That’s exactly right. So unlike other platforms that use
templates or a single text corpus to learn from, every single
user actually gets their own Kylie. It trains on their previous
e-mail history, it learns how they speak, when to speak,
what words to use – “Hi” versus “Hello” versus “Hey” – in
what situations. And it actually adapts to your style and the
person you’re talking to for every single conversation. So it’s
not just a bland monotonic AI. It’s really trying to be you.

Kirill:

Wow, that’s fantastic! So if you can disclose—or to the level
you can disclose—what kind of algorithms went into Kylie
that facilitate this type of AI?

Sinan:

Sure. There’s actually really two parts of it. The first part is
taking in an unstructured text data from the users, whether
that’s their Twitter, their e-mail, their Slack conversations,
and applying a structure to that corpus. So we’re talking
about unsupervised models here, some of which are open
source, some of which are built by myself and I cannot
disclose, unfortunately. (Laughs) But the ability to add
structure to text is the first part. Second part was creating a
natural language generation model. So, our generation
models are actually part generative, part retrieval because
we really want to give the ability for users to create their own
text but also maintain grammatical structure and make sure
that the actual conversation is flowing. So structuring text
data and then creating, actually generating natural language
– those are the two main steps that we actually have to focus
on for Kylie.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

17

	  

Kirill:

Okay. Very interesting. And so by combining them, she can
come up with a template text that somebody—do users need
to adjust it and then send it off? Or do users need to—like,
they can just click ‘send’ right away?

Sinan:

They can do either. They can either set up threshold and
say, “If you’re 99% confident, please send this e-mail out
without my consideration.” Or they could always say, “Please
only send a draft.” So they’ll put a draft directly in their email inbox. You know, “No need to come to Kylie. We’ll put it
directly in your inbox and then you can revise, change,
whatever you’d like and then send it on your own time.”

Kirill:

That is so cool. And is there a limit to how large these emails get? Like, can she only do like 20 lines or can she do it
unlimited?

Sinan:

No. There is unlimited. She can do it short or as long as
you’d like. You know, it the response is “Sounds good,” or a
four paragraph description of your company, that is what
she will draft.

Kirill:

Awesome. And what is the success rate that you’ve been
seeing? Have you had any feedback from—I know she’s only
two weeks in production—

Sinan:

We have.

Kirill:

So what are people saying?

Sinan:

So we’ve had a lot of feedback, and the main thing that we’re
hearing is “This is saving so much time.” And here’s the
interesting thing. We knew there were going to be slipups;
we knew there were going to be mess-ups. She’ll draft
something that’s not exactly correct. We anticipated this.
What we did not anticipate was even when this happened,

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

18

	  

even when Kylie would create a draft where you can kind of
see where she was going with it but it wasn’t exactly correct,
our users still see this as a great success because it saves
them time from really thinking about this e-mail from the
ground up. So even if parts of the e-mail aren’t exactly
correct and they have to adjust it, it still saves overall time
from writing it from scratch.
Kirill:

That is very interesting. So is this only for business owners
or can anybody with an inbox e-mailing their own friends—
can they use Kylie as well?

Sinan:

Anyone can use it right now. We are currently offering the
services for sales and marketing people for free. Everyone
else is put on a waitlist but that waitlist will start to become
actual users in a couple of months. So I would get on that
waitlist now. Or if you’re already in sales and marketing or
working in that kind of field, go ahead and sign up for free.
But to your point, anyone can really use the software,
anyone can use Kylie whether or not you’re a CEO, an
assistant or a barista. You know, it doesn’t matter what you
do or who you are. The ability to learn from your
communications and actually communicate for you – that is
open to everyone. It comes back to what I was saying before,
really democratizing AI. Not only selectively giving it to a few
people, but offering it to a wide variety of people.

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, that’s really very interesting so, yeah,
something to check out. I think that was a very valuable
conversation about an example of application of AI which
can actually change lives of so many people and increase
efficiency and save time. So best of luck with that project. I
think it’s going to go places.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

19

	  

Sinan:

Thank you. Thank you very much.

Kirill:

Fantastic! And I wanted to ask you about something from
your book description. I think this will be an interesting
thing for us to talk about as well. In your book, you talk
about the five most important steps of data science. And I
know you probably don’t want to – or can’t even, maybe –
give away too much from your book. But at the same time, if
you could somehow outline these five steps and give us
some insight into them, I think a lot of our users could
benefit from that.

Sinan:

Absolutely. So the basic steps that I outline in the book and
I actually go over one by one, step by step with many, many
examples in both high level and code is basically first you
have to come up with an idea. And that sounds like a very
simple thing when you say it, you know, very quickly and in
passing by, just “I have an idea.” But that idea really has to
come from somewhere.
So like I mentioned, the idea for Kylie came when we got a
lot of requests from our users to help us automate their
inbox. So asking an interesting question and asking the
right question can be very, very difficult. And as I’ll say later,
the ability to go back on yourself and actually go backwards
in time and try again, humility almost is a big step. So even
if you think it’s the right question, you have to be able to
prove it’s the right question. So have an interesting question,
something like “Can I predict heart attacks? Can I predict
cancer? Can I add structure to tweets?”
Once you’ve come up with an idea or a question to ask
yourself, what you have to do then is obtain data. Now,
obtaining data in and of itself can be difficult or easy,

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

20

	  

whether it’s open dataset or you have to collect it yourself.
That in and of itself is a very large question. Once you’ve
obtained the data, you have to start actually not only
cleaning and modelling, but evaluating. So I’m kind of
mixing, I’m blending some of the steps together, but once
you have the data, being able to clean the data, understand
the data, manipulate and visualize the data. And you’ll
notice that I’m spending a lot of time not on the modelling or
the evaluation, but asking the right questions, getting the
data, cleaning the data. Because those steps themselves are
almost as important, if not more important, than the actual
models we’ll apply to them. Asking the right question,
obtaining the data, cleaning the data is almost as important,
if not more important, than which machine learning model
should I throw at it. Because if you’re asking the wrong
question, if you’re applying a model to dirty data, your
outcome is going to be either nonsensical or no one will care
about it. So you have to be really careful.
So I think going throughout the entire book, asking the right
question, obtaining the data, cleaning the data, modelling
the data, evaluating your models. And the final step is
application. It’s communication and visualization. It’s taking
what you’ve built and giving it to the world in a digestible
format whether it’s a graph, a website, whatever it is,
because if you’re not sharing it with the world or the
company or your dog or your cat or whoever needs it –
again, it’s useless, effectively.
Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree. It reminds me of—yesterday I was doing
a case study, like presenting a case study on our website, on
our platform. And at the very start, we were talking about
U.N. analytics, analytics of U.N. votes. And if you hadn’t

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

21

	  

cleaned up the data properly, then the whole of the rest of
the case study, of the presentation of analytics was totally
useless. It really reminds me, or it kind of aligns with what
you said here, that the very first couple of steps are about
getting the idea, obtaining the data and cleaning it,
preparing it, are so crucial for the rest of the analytics.
Because so many times people do analytics and then they
realize that the data initially was wrong or the assumptions
were wrong, or that idea, nobody actually needs that idea.
And all that effort has gone to waste.
Sinan:

Right. And I think it’s because a lot of people rush into the
last steps, which is the modelling, the evaluating and the
application, is that they forget the first parts: “Did I ask the
right question? Did I get the right data? And did I clean it
enough?” and they wasted time, they wasted resources. And
it’s unfortunate. So I think that people need to slow down
and really start from the beginning and question themselves
every step of the way and talk to people, ask someone, “Hey,
if I built this, would you use it?” or “Who would use this?” or
“Do you think this is worthwhile?” Data science is a lot more
a team effort than a solo hobby. You know, talk to your
colleagues. Talk to people who don’t know data science
because hopefully they’ll use it too.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. And they can use it without knowing how it
works in the background.

Sinan:

Absolutely.

Kirill:

And an interesting thing I wanted to ask you is, a couple of
times we’ve brought up on this podcast TensorFlow. So
you’ve mentioned this methodology and I’m assuming it’s
not something that you cannot talk about, it’s not something

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

22

	  

completely sensitive. If you could give our listeners a bit of
an overview of what TensorFlow is and how you use it or
how people could generally use it in business or in other
applications.
Sinan:

Of course. TensorFlow is an open source machine learning
library that’s actually out of Google, so you know it’s good.
(Laughs) And they actually do—interestingly enough, people
always think that “Oh, they’re a neural network deep
learning package.” And yes, they do that, but they also do
regression. They do linear regressions, for example. You can
do actually fairly basic things in TensorFlow, not just neural
networks and things like this. We at Legion Analytics, and at
Kylie mostly—we use TensorFlow primarily for the deep
learning neural net technology. We apply their neural nets –
specifically LSTMs and sequence-to-sequence models – to
our text data. So in our generative and retrievable natural
language generation, a big part of that is actually powered
by TensorFlow and their deep learning technology.

Kirill:

Okay, gotcha. So it’s an open source package that pretty
much anybody can use?

Sinan:

Absolutely. And I will say this, I’ll give them a big plug. Their
documentation is some of the cleanest and easiest to read I
have ever seen. You know, they actually take examples and
they break them up into beginner, medium and advanced
level. And not a lot of documentation does that. They break
up this thing for beginners and advanced users. So I think
Google and TensorFlow team did a very good job at creating
materials to get started with it.

Kirill:

Oh, that’s really cool. And this is a Python-based package?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

23

	  

Sinan:

It is Python-based, but they have API and other languages. I
use it primarily in Python. I do examples with it in my book
with Python.

Kirill:

Wait, hold on. So you actually have coding examples in your
book?

Sinan:

Absolutely! The book is littered with coding examples,
starting from basic syntax of Python all the way to our final
case study. An example is using TensorFlow to do image
analysis and text analysis.

Kirill:

Wow, that’s really cool! I’m really looking forward to that
now. (Laughs)

Sinan:

(Laughs) I’m glad.

Kirill:

Yeah, I’ll check it out. Okay, so that was a great overview. So
we’ve talked about quite a lot of stuff: about your General
Assembly experience, about your company Legion Analytics,
about Kylie – your little two-month-old baby, we’ve talked
about TensorFlow. So quite a lot of topics covered and this
has been a great discussion. Now let’s move on to some more
kind of rapid fire questions that I would like to get your
thoughts on. First of all, what has been your biggest
challenge as a data scientist that you’ve ever faced?

Sinan:

The biggest challenge I’ve ever faced I would definitely have
to say is coming in with a very theoretical math background,
having to learn not just how to code but how to code
properly and how to code in a team without formal
education in computer science. That was probably the
hardest thing I had to do in the beginning.

Kirill:

Gotcha, gotcha. And I’ll attest to that. Coding in a team is a
completely different story to coding by yourself. Right?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

24

	  

Sinan:

Absolutely. Absolutely! 100%!

Kirill:

Yeah. Okay, next one is, what is a recent win that you can
share with us that you’ve had in your career? Like, you’ve
obviously had multiple: the book, Kylie, Legion Analytics and
so on. But what would you say is the biggest one for you and
why?

Sinan:

I would say actually the biggest win is not my book, it’s not
actually the release of Kylie, but it’s actually been that
recently we brought on a lot of new team members in the
development data science space and our new employees, our
new team members saw the release of Kylie and were so
excited that they wanted to join the team. So I think the
biggest win I’ve had recently was the actual growth of our
team and the growth of the people who wanted to work on
this technology because they realized how important it was
going to be.

Kirill:

Wow! It sounds like you’ve got a—or you’re creating a team
of people who are very passionate about taking the world to
being a better place through data science and machine
learning.

Sinan:

And that’s really important because I can find someone who
is good at coding or good at math or good at data science. I
can find that. What is harder to find is someone who is not
only good at everything, but actually wants to work on the
project that we’re doing and actually sees the future benefit
of what we’re doing and why we’re doing it.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. And what would you say is the mission
statement of your company?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

25

	  

Sinan:

I think our mission statement would be something along the
lines of using machine learning and artificial intelligence to
enhance the efficiency of the workplace.

Kirill:

Fantastic! I love that mission statement. I’m sure a lot of
people can relate and align to that. Yeah, Kylie is just a good
boost of confidence for those people to really put in their
best efforts into the future of the company. And next
question is, what is your one most favourite thing about
being a data scientist?

Sinan:

Oh, wow! I think the number one thing I love about being a
data scientist—I think actually it comes from the education
side, is the ability to work on different domains and different
projects and still have it be very interesting and useful. I
think the ability to switch from communication to sales to
marketing to scheduling to coffee shops and I think this
ability to switch between gears while still maintaining the
data science workflow, machine learning workflow – I think
that’s the most exciting part about being a data scientist.

Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree. And on top of that, I would like to add
that also what I really enjoy about data science is the
transferability of your skills. Like, domain knowledge is
definitely very important. But the core skills of whether it’s
machine learning or presentation or thinking about the
problem, whether it’s using programming languages – you
can just take them, pick them up like a suitcase and go to
the next project that you’re working on and just apply them
there and that’s very exciting in data science.

Sinan:

Exactly.

Kirill:

Totally. And next one is a big one. So this is like a very
philosophical question. Like, being in the space of data

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

26

	  

science, you cannot ignore the things that are happening
around us, whether it’s Tesla, SpaceX, self-driving cars and
the different types of AI that’s popping up, even your own
Kylie system. So the question is, where do you think the field
of data science is going? And what should our listeners
prepare for to be ready for the future that’s coming?
Sinan:

That is a big one. I think that the future of data science, the
future of machine learning and AI—I’ll piggyback off a
previous answer I had and say that the future of data
science won’t necessarily be in the most innovative software
technologies. But what it’s going to be is the ability to apply
these technologies to fields that have not been updated, in in
some cases, for centuries. And I think that to prepare
yourselves—the listeners—as you are learning data science,
as you are listening to a lecture on chi-square test or
listening about pandas or R or data frames or data
manipulation. As you’re learning this, never ever forget why
or how you’re going to use this information. Never get lost in
the theory or even in the practice. Always keep yourself
grounded by saying, “You know what? My wife’s shop uses
data and I think they’re using it incorrectly. How can I bring
this to them?” or “My buddy is starting a vineyard and I
want to be able to use image recognition to help them know
when their yields are coming in or when their yields are good
or bad.” So always remember, you can apply this not
necessarily to the most—Uber, Tesla, SpaceX, SolarCity—not
to the most innovative companies, but never forget that
there is a plethora of SMBs, smaller to medium-sized
companies who could also use this technology.

Kirill:

Wonderful. I love that answer. Yeah, definitely that’s
something we’ve already discussed a bit and it’s good to

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

27

	  

reiterate that. Always look out for where you can apply the
knowledge that you’re learning. And next one is—I’ve got like
a bit of an interesting question, which might come off as a
surprise question for you because we haven’t talked about
this before. But I’ve just thought of this—you, of course,
achieved a lot and you’re applying data science in many
different forms and ways, and you’re even teaching data
science in General Assembly. My question to you is, how do
you learn? How do you keep learning and refreshing your
skills? Are there books you read? Are there people you
follow? Are there courses you take? In a position in which
you are, what are the next steps for you to keep learning and
improving your own data science skills?
Sinan:

As a teacher, one of the most effective skills a teacher can
have is knowing your students’ learning styles, how do they
learn – are they auditory, visual, kinaesthetic, do they
practice, do they have to see it to believe it. And I believe
that my learning style is very combination of kinaesthetic
and visual. So the way I learn is actually by watching other
people do it and then actually trying to mimic them and then
seeing I can also get it that way as well. So what I usually do
end up doing is I follow a lot of machine learning specialists,
and not even like on Twitter, but I follow blogs, I follow even
Coursera courses if I can find a good one or a Udemy course
even or a course like that. And what I try to do is I watch the
person perform the skill, whether that’s machine learning,
TensorFlow or whatever it is, and then I actually pause the
video or what have you and actually try it myself. And I
actually hope I fail. I truly do.

Kirill:

Why?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

28

	  

Sinan:

Because if I get it right, that’s boring. (Laughs) Because if I
fail, that means “Great, this is a chance for me to not only
figure out what I’ve done wrong but make sure that no one
else fails here again so we can move forward as a machine
learning community.” So I actually hope that I mess it up
the first couple of times, because I want to feel what it feels
like to mess up this neural net so that I can notice it when
someone else might do it as well.

Kirill:

Wow! That’s a very profound thought. And yeah, I agree with
you, it’s important to—kind of like this messing up will also
point out to you how students who are taking this course,
how they feel when they’re doing it and that can help you
understand how you can better serve your students to avoid
creating pitfalls like that for them, right?

Sinan:

Right. I actually call that almost an academic empathy. So
your empathy is you feel what someone else feels, but
academic empathy is almost learning how they learn. So I
have to put myself in the mind of my students or my
employees or anyone as I’m trying to tell them something
and I’m trying to get in their heads. I’m like, “How are you
perceiving what I’m saying?” And if I’ve had the experience of
messing up or screwing up or having to do something over
and over and over again, I’m much more likely to be patient
with them and to work through their problems or even
seeing an error that they’re having because, “Oh, I’ve also
had that error. I know how to fix it.”
And that’s really important because I feel like a lot of people
put data science/machine learning on this pedestal like, “I’ll
never be able to know enough math,” or “I’ll never be able to
code as well as they do.” But that’s okay because you don’t
have to code like the best coder in the world. You don’t have

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

29

	  

to be the most brilliant mathematician to apply even the
most simple models in a useful way. So having that kind of
academic empathy, the ability to feel what they feel as you’re
telling someone something, that’s really going to inspire
them to keep going even when you’re gone. Even when
you’re no longer their teacher, they’ll feel like it’s okay to
mess up because, you know, “Sinan told me that when I
mess up, I have to find what I did wrong, fix it and then help
the next person.” And that starts a chain reaction of all
these people who are better learning data science and not
quitting and actually applying what they’ve learned
eventually.
Kirill:

I totally agree. That’s a very inspiring thought. It’s
interesting how what you just mentioned about getting into
other people’s heads and understanding how they see the
problem and they think about it. Just recently I learned this
concept from one of my friends of a threshold concept. Well,
concept of a concept. (Laughs) Basically this term “threshold
concept” where as you live your life, as you learn things,
sometimes you learn something that completely changes
your view forever. You can never unlearn it back. For me,
one time it was when I learned that we’re all created of
atoms and when you, for example, touch the table it’s not
you actually touching the table, it’s electrons pushing away
from each other and you’re never physically touching the
table. And for me that changed the world. Like, I can never
think about touching the same way as I used to. And these
threshold concepts for educators, they’re very dangerous
because once it gets into your head you can never unlearn it
and it’s very hard to look back at how somebody would think
about the same problem without having learned this

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

30

	  

threshold concept. So what you mentioned there is a very
important skill for any educator to have, I think.
Sinan:

It’s a very difficult skill to have, I think. You’re absolutely
right because I might have a concept because I know how
something works, but I also know that my student doesn’t
know it yet. So I have to somehow not just tell them what it
is, but get them to believe it. They have to somehow find that
answer themselves quickly and efficiently but, you know,
effectively. (Laughs)

Kirill:

Yeah, gotcha. Yeah, totally. That was a very, very interesting
discussion. I think this whole podcast was full of value, so
thank you so much for coming on the show. And finally, how
would you say our listeners can contact you, follow you,
follow your career? Because I’m sure there’s going to be lots
and lots of people who will want to learn more about what
you’re doing and get in touch and just keep following and
see where your career takes you.

Sinan:

Absolutely. You can always follow me on Twitter. My Twitter
handle is @Prof_OZ. You can always follow me there. I’m
tweeting about new stuff and new technologies. You can
actually find my contact information on my book. I actually
put it in there because I actually very much welcome people
reaching out to me with questions or suggestions or
comments. You know, one of my mottos I like to say is, “How
can I help?” and I ask that to everyone listening right now.
How can I help? I’d like to be able to offer you guidance and
answers to questions that you may have. So feel free to tweet
at me or find my e-mail address, which is my first name,
sinan@legionanalytics.com. And honestly, I look forward to
hearing from everyone listening.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

31

	  

Kirill:

Fantastic! Thank you very much. We’ll definitely include
those in the comments. And I’ve got a very interesting
question for you at the very end. One final question I
normally ask. What is your one favourite book that you can
recommend to our listeners? (Laughs)

Sinan:

(Laughs) Well, there is this great book called “Principles of
Data Science.” No. (Laughs) Well, first I would be remiss to
not mention again my new book “Principles of Data Science”
on Packt Publishing, also available on Amazon. But if I were
to offer a book that I personally learned from to help me
write this book, I think would probably have to talk about
the “Introduction to Statistical Learning,” the ISL, and I
think it’s a very, very popular book. It’s a very common
book. I think a lot of people use it in statistical classes and it
takes a very theoretical approach to data science and
machine learning. But I think it’s necessary because I think
that if people get too gung-ho on the coding, because they
feel like that’s the easiest thing to learn, then they’re not
really going to get the full extent of machine learning and
statistical modelling.

Kirill:

Fantastic! That’s a very good concept. So there you go, guys
and girls listening to this podcast. Check out “Principles of
Data Science” by yours truly, Sinan Ozdemir and also “Intro
to Statistical Learning.” And on that note, thank you so
much, Sinan, for coming on the show and sharing all this
depth of knowledge with us.

Sinan:

Thank you so much for having me. I hope I was helpful and I
look forward to hearing from each and every one of you.

Kirill:

Fantastic. Okay, take care. Bye.

Sinan:

Have a good one. Bye.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

32

	  

(background music plays)
Kirill:

So there you have it. And I really hope that you enjoyed
today’s episode. Personally, my favourite part was the
discussion around applications of machine learning and
artificial intelligence. We do live in a world where innovation
is key and where businesses can be started in days and then
grow to million and even billion dollar businesses in months.
And oftentimes people find themselves looking for the next
big idea that’s going to really impact the world, that’s going
to radically change things.
Indeed, there is a space for that, but that is not always the
thing that you should be looking for. Sometimes if you look
around, you might find quick wins. You might find ways
where you can apply these new technologies or these new
algorithms, machine learning and artificial intelligence in the
things around you to make the world a better place. Like, an
example we talked about, where you’ve got a mom and dad
bakery. They’re not using machine learning, and maybe
there’s a way to help them to start using machine learning
and artificial intelligence to better serve their customers.
And by filling in a niche like that, you can still come up with
great products that will impact the world and make it a
better place.
So that was an eye-opening discussion and oftentimes we do
try to think way beyond what is around us but sometimes
it’s just worth slowing down and looking around and seeing
how you can change things right here, right now. And of
course, if you enjoyed the discussions in this episode, I
highly recommend picking up the book that Sinan just
published. It’s called “Principles of Data Science” and it is
available on Amazon right now.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

33

	  

And as always, to get the show notes and transcript for this
episode, come over to www.superdatascience.com/21 and
there you’ll find all the resources that we mentioned and
also you’ll find all the links to Sinan’s social media so you
can follow him and his career. Thank you so much for your
attention today. I really appreciate you and I’ll see you next
time. Until then, happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/21

34

