	  

SDS PODCAST
EPISODE 16
WITH
RICHARD HOPKINS

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

1

	  

Kirill:

This
is
episode
number
16,
with
PricewaterhouseCoopers Richard Hopkins.

Director

at

(background music plays)
Welcome to the SuperDataScience podcast. My name is Kirill
Eremenko, data science coach and lifestyle entrepreneur.
And each week we bring you inspiring people and ideas to
help you build your successful career in data science.
Thanks for being here today and now let’s make the complex
simple.
(background music plays)
Hello and welcome to this episode of the SuperDataScience
podcast. I'm super excited to bring you today my good friend
and mentor, Richard Hopkins. Richard and I go way back.
We met back in 2012, when we were both working at
Deloitte, and we've had a hell of a ride since. We worked on
this massive project for months and months and months
where we were flying in and out of this remote location, and
we really got to bond along the way. And in this episode, we
share our experiences about two things. First of all, we talk
about data and how Richard, being the director at
PricewaterhouseCoopers and running a lot of the business
transformation that they do for their clients, and the
business operation side of things, how Richard uses data in
his day to day role, and what insights he can share from his
position with you about how data drives organisations.
Also in this podcast, we talk about mentoring. So Richard
has been my mentor for several years now, and I have
learned so much from him, and in this podcast, we'll answer
some questions about what mentorship is, how to be a

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

2

	  

mentor, how to be a mentee, how to look for a mentor, and
what this relationship entails.
And finally, there's a special surprise for you in this episode
towards the very end, Richard will reveal a position that he's
currently recruiting for. So if you're interested in developing
a career in data science, this might be your opportunity.
Especially if you're located in Sydney or Melbourne in
Australia, and you're interested in the space of consulting.
So there's a very interesting position, or several positions,
that Richard is recruiting for. He's building up this team,
and he actually needs people with data science skills. So if
you want to jump straight ahead to that before you listen to
the podcast, feel free to do that. This is going to happen
somewhere around the 57th minute of the podcast. Or feel
free to listen to the podcast to understand exactly what we're
talking about, understand the background, and definitely
check out that opportunity. Richard shares some contact
details as well. So if you're in those cities and you're
interested, definitely get in touch with Richard. This could
be a great opportunity for you.
So all in all, this is a very exciting episode. It was so much
fun to catch up with one of my good friends and mentors,
and I'm happy that you're going to be part of this
conversation. Without further ado, I bring to you Richard
Hopkins of PwC.
(background music plays)
Welcome everybody to the SuperDataScience podcast. Today
I've got my friend and mentor, Richard Hopkins, joining me
for the show. Richard, welcome to the show. How are you
today?
Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

3

	  

Richard:

I'm well, Kirill. Thanks for having me.

Kirill:

Thank you so much. And where are you located right now?
I'm in Brisbane, Australia. Where are you?

Richard:

I'm in Sydney, Australia, on a very grey, overcast, miserable
day.

Kirill:

Yeah. Yeah, what's going on with the weather there? It's so
sunny here in Brisbane!

Richard:

It's sunny one day, and cloudy and cold the next.

Kirill:

Yeah, yeah, I saw a few photos online. And just to quickly
introduce Richard, we go way back with Richard Hopkins.
We worked together at Deloitte, and then kept working
together, even when we weren't on the same project, and
since then, Richard, you moved to Sydney. What took you
down there to Sydney?

Richard:

Yeah, so I got offered the national lead position for their
Operational Improvement team. So I head that up in Sydney
at the moment.

Kirill:

At PwC, that's right?

Richard:

PwC. That's correct.

Kirill:

Yeah, so Richard made the move from Deloitte to PwC, and
now he's building a huge team there, in this area. And what
exactly do you do, so our listeners can relate a little bit
more?

Richard:

In layman's terms, I basically make companies more
profitable by improving operations. And I tend to work with
companies that are in a distressed environment.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

4

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, that’s exactly what Richard is best at, taking
companies out of a bad place and putting them into a good
one. And that actually is a good segue to how we met. Can
you elaborate on that a little bit more? Because I was new to
Deloitte, so I just joined Deloitte, and I was put on a project
with Richard. What were your impressions at the time?

Richard:

Yeah, so we worked together on a project where a very large
global company had bought another large global company.
And about 12 months after the merger things weren’t going
so well, so our team got brought in to try and remedy that.
And one of the key missing elements of that team was a data
scientist. So I requested that we get a data scientist and they
put you forward.

Kirill:

Yeah, I clearly remember that time. This was back in 2012,
everybody. I was looking through the profiles of the people
who were working on the project, and specifically of Richard,
because I was going to work with him, and I was looking at
your photo and I was like “I don’t like this guy.” (laughs)
Really, the first impression was like “I don’t want to work
with him.” Remember we had that first phone call, because
this was a remote location and you were already at that
location? We had that phone call and from there we started
to get along.

Richard:

Yeah, it worked well. 13 months working together and we
grew that project and had a really successful outcome, so it
was great.

Kirill:

Yeah, crazy. And we really got to bond. It was the first time
when through a work environment, I actually got to bond
with someone. I remember out of those 13 months, for 7 of
them, we were flying in and out, like one and a half hour
flight on Monday to the location, and one and a half hour

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

5

	  

flight back on Friday. And all those stories at the airport,
getting there early to sit in the lounge and stuff like that,
having a chat – that was so much fun.
Richard:

Yeah, it was great.

Kirill:

Good times. So we really bonded with Richard and we’ll talk
more about the role that mentorship has played in our
relationship and in our career growth further down in this
podcast. But for now I wanted to start with the obvious
question. For those of you who haven’t heard or don’t know
Richard that well yet, Richard is very good at what he does
in the sense of restructuring companies and bringing them
to a good state where they can either be sold or they can
continue operating. However, Richard isn’t actually a data
scientist. He specifically asked me to say that, to stress that
point. That he isn’t a data scientist, but at the same time he
knows how to work with data, and he knows how to put the
right people in the right places to do that data work for him
and then he takes action based on those decisions. I want to
get a little bit into that and we’ll slowly get into that. So can
you tell me, and for the benefit of our listeners, when did
you first become aware of the fact that data is becoming so
important globally and in the way that businesses operate
that you started to implement or use data in your business
decisions?

Richard:

Yeah, sure. It was probably that project that we worked on,
Kirill. I was reporting to senior management in Australia. I
was looking at the financial numbers and the reports that
management were producing from within the company, and
I could see a very large disconnect between what was being
reported and what was actually happening in operations on
the ground. And you mentioned working from that remote

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

6

	  

location. That gave me the visibility on what was happening
on the ground. So I saw a very dire need to get the data
correct and in a format that actually resembled the true
picture. That was a real catalyst for me to start pursuing
that work flow that basically links data and operations
together.
Kirill:

Yeah, totally. And would you say that had an impact and it
was a worthwhile thing to do?

Richard:

Absolutely. It changed the dynamics of that project. I mean,
it didn’t necessarily change what I wanted to do on the
project, but it gave me the support and the ammunition to
have robust discussions with management to make change
happen. Not having that data previously, I was acting more
on hearsay rather than acting on facts and they could
always defend their position. But once I had the data that
showed the true fact, and in a way that matched up with, or
supported, what was happening in operations, that’s when
changes could happen.

Kirill:

Very, very true. I remember some of those conversations. I
sat in on some of the conversations where Richard was
actually presenting to global CEOs of this billion dollar
company. This is very, very impressive. And a lot of this stuff
we can’t mention – the name of the client and so on – but
still to this day I remember the very tough conversations
because there were so many parties involved, including the
acquired company and the acquirer and different executives
in the company. So data definitely helped to back those
decisions. And would you say, Richard, that at times—
because from what I was hearing and seeing, I would think
this was the case. But from your position, would you say
that at times, what the data was showing was very

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

7

	  

controversial to what the executives knew and what they
were standing by? And you had to actually convince them
that they were wrong. Was that the case sometimes?
Richard:

That’s right. It actually was an interesting cycle. The first
meeting we had utilizing the data profile, and you probably
remember this, the data didn’t quite show the right outcome
to what was happening in operations and we had to spend a
lot of time changing the data. So at the first meeting we had
the stakeholders, certain parties definitely had the upper
hand. The second meeting we had with the stakeholders,
when we’d had a couple of weeks to structure the data in a
way to make it very usable and it actually resembled the
true position, the tide turned in terms of the negotiation
power. And also, the overall outcome for all stakeholders
became a lot better because everyone was a lot more
informed. That was a real eye-opener. The data was saying
one thing, operations was saying another, and it took quite a
bit of a process to get those two to align.

Kirill:

Yeah, that’s a great example. And I like that you mentioned
that the outcome is better for everybody when you see the
truth. Data doesn’t lie. Sometimes consultants go into a
company and they make stuff up and they hypothesize and
so on. But when you look at the data, the bottom-up
approach, it just doesn’t lie to you.

Richard:

Absolutely. And I think that’s a critical point and hopefully
we get to talk about it more, is how the traditional top-down
approach that consulting use and their methodology
matched with the data scientists’ bottom-up approach, if
used properly, can be extremely powerful.

Kirill:

Yeah, we’ll definitely touch on that more. But for now I just
wanted to go into a bit more detail into that. I would like you

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

8

	  

to give our listeners a generalized example of all of this that
we’re talking about, about data and operations, and how
that changed the stakeholders’ view. I understand this is all
sensitive information, and we cannot disclose a lot of stuff,
but at the same time out of the things that you know, maybe
you’ve done other projects with other companies, and maybe
you can generalize an example for us just to get a feel for
what you mean when you say that data really gave you that
extra view or other perspective on what’s happening in the
operations and it really clicked when you started looking at
the data.
Richard:

Sure. So one example that comes to mind was a global
airline that I worked with for approximately 12 months. They
were having some working capital issues. And for the
listeners out there, working capital is basically how do you
get as much cash as you can in the bank rather than
spending it and throwing it out the door. So it’s a
combination of debtors, creditors and inventory.
They were having a huge working capital issue and they
thought that they had to go out and collect cash faster off of
debtors. They thought that was their solution because their
debtors were over the standard 30 days. And when I
undertook the analysis, it actually wasn’t the fact that
debtors were their problem. It was very clear that they were
paying their creditors too early. It was also very clear that
they were paying their creditors too much. And it was also
very clear that they had way too much unnecessary
inventory. And the only way that I was able to do that was
having the data tell the story. I actually used your colleague
– I think you remember Anna – on that project.

Kirill:

Oh, yeah.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

9

	  

Richard:

So again, I partnered with a data scientist to come up and
help me find the solution with that project because what the
company thought was the issue was very, very different to
what the actual issue was.

Kirill:

Fantastic. That’s a fantastic example. And I like that very
capitalistic approach or term when you said that they’re
paying their creditors too early. You’d think that you’d want
to pay your debts back really quickly. But if you have
payment term of 60 or whatever days, why pay earlier? That
should totally make sense to a lot of people. That’s
something to abide by.
That’s a great example, and that’s a good introduction to
another question I wanted to ask you. How do you feel about
working with data through the power of the data scientist
that you’re working with? Obviously, with your background
and with your focus on operations, you just cannot afford to
sit down and learn all those tools, and learn your Python, R
programming, and you don’t necessarily need to. Because
you have this access to all of these people who already know
these things who can do the job. So what would you say
about how you feel about working with data scientists in one
team and managing them and getting the most out of their
interaction with the data that you supply them?

Richard:

Sure. I’ve just hired a data scientist in my team and the
reason why I specifically hired this data scientist more than
going and working with their data science team within PwC,
which there is a whole data team, the key difference and
value add that he brought that traditional data scientists
didn’t, and I think you learned this as well, Kirill, and this is
the skill that you have now, is understanding the operations
of the business or the situation that you’re doing the data

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

10

	  

analysis for. I think sometimes data scientists tend to go
straight into the analysis. They get an answer and they think
that’s the answer because the data said it was, and they
haven’t relayed it back to the operational environment. And
they also can’t explain how to use that data in an
operational context. I think that was the best data scientist
I’ve worked with are certainly the ones who understand how
to use the data and make an operational decision.
Kirill:

That’s some valid advice for those of our listeners who are in
executive positions or managerial positions similar to
Richard’s where you’re not the person crunching the
numbers, you’re not the data scientist, but you are working
closely with data scientists. I totally side by that advice, that
it is very important to make sure that you create an
environment where your data scientists or analysts are
immersed into that domain and knowledge that the business
problem at hand presents. For me, it was a make it or break
it on that project we were working with. I wasn’t just
crunching numbers. I was actually flying over there for 7
months every week to immerse myself in the operations of
that business to understand it better, to uncover those
things that sometimes data cannot show you, but they help
you deal with the data much better. Thank you very much
for that advice. I’m sure a lot of our both data scientist
listeners and managerial listeners will find it useful.
Speaking of domain knowledge, how do you personally go
about developing domain knowledge? When you’re on a
brand new project, you just started with a company, what
are your first steps to understand that intrinsic environment
in which the business operates?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

11

	  

Richard:

It’s a combination of listening to the team and having those
stakeholder meetings and stepping through the end-to-end
process. Sometimes you look at the whole business, which is
generally what I do, but other times you look at very specific
aspects of the business. So it’s just getting an end-to-end
view of the operations and then it’s going through the
systems themselves and seeing what the numbers are telling
you. So for me, I very much work with the accounting
system, so I look at the profit and loss, balance sheet, cash
flow, and try and link up what the system is saying to what
the people in those meetings told me about operations.
Again, it depends on what aspect of the business you’re
looking at.

Kirill:

Yeah, solid points there. I think it’s probably a bit different
to the way I go about getting domain knowledge because
obviously you’re in more of a position where you deal with
executives, and as a data scientist I deal with people more.
Also executives sometimes, but now that I’ve got some
experience and I’ve been leading projects, but when you’re
just working on the projects it’s more about sitting down
with the people and watching them work it. I remember at
one of my previous jobs after Deloitte, I was actually sitting
down with people to—you know how sometimes when you
call into an organization they say “This call is being recorded
and monitored for training purposes,” and stuff like that? So
I would sit in on those calls that are being recorded and
monitored just to understand how the business operates.
You get some very powerful insights out of that.

Richard:

One thing that I tend to notice is that new recruits, whether
it’s a data scientist or an accountant or consultant, the
listening skills of those people tend to be not lacking, but

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

12

	  

not to the level that they need to be to really obtain the
information that they’re getting from the company or the
stakeholder. So I guess one bit of advice when you are
starting out on projects and trying to obtain as much
information is try and ask as many questions as you can.
The ratio should be 70% of them talking, 30% of you talking.
That’s just my rough ratio but really, really listening to those
people on the ground and trying to help them understand
what their issue is by asking the questions because quite
often, they’ll do the problem solving themselves on the spot.
It’s really crucial, and it’s something that quite often new
recruits to the profession lack.
Kirill:

Yeah totally, and a very good point there as well. It stands in
line with the saying “Those who know don’t speak and those
who speak don’t know.” If you know what you’re doing, then
you’re not going to be talking. You’re going to take some time
to absorb more information rather than just start talking at
the time. Oh, yeah, now I remember. (laughs) This brings
back memories.
Richard was very politically correct just now, being very
vague who he’s talking about but actually I made that
mistake one time. We had a call on that project and I was
talking to the CFO of that company directly and reporting on
something, and I was just blabbering on and on and I was
just making these assumptions as I went on and the CFO
just went like, “No, that’s wrong.” I was in this situation
where I just said too much and I couldn’t take it back, and
then afterwards you told me “Everything was good but you
should talk less sometimes and listen more.” Do you
remember that?

Richard:

I certainly do.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

13

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, I definitely learned from that a lot. All right, so before
we move on to the really cool part of the podcast where I
want to talk about mentoring, I wanted to ask you about
that point you mentioned, the top-down versus bottom-up
approach. Could you tell us a bit more what is this topdown, and what is this bottom-up, and who uses what and
how do they compare?

Richard:

Yeah, sure. So traditionally consultants use what they call a
top-down approach, where they will look at the market data,
then they will talk to senior executives, then they tend to go
down to the next level of line managers and then they get
down to the people on the ground, if they ever do get down
to the people on the ground, but very rarely. They scope
their projects based on the information available from the
top-down approach and then form that opinion.
In my view, what accountants tend to do, what data
scientists tend to do is work much more from a bottom-up,
where the data and the people on the ground outline what
actually is happening day-to-day. Quite often there is a
disconnect between those two, the top-down and bottom-up
numbers, so where I’ve found that my best success has been
is where I do both of those analyses and I link those two
together generally in what’s called the driver tree analysis. I
won’t go into detail of exactly what a driver tree analysis is,
but it’s basically working out what happens with the
financials and what levers in the operations are causing
those financial results. Again, I won’t go into too much detail
about that. But having that top-down and bottom-up
approach links the data to operations and gives the full true
picture. I try not to go too technical in the
operation/accounting space.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

14

	  

Kirill:

No, that totally makes sense. I also learned the comparison
between the two. After working for some time at Deloitte,
and then working with the consultants as well, because
consulting was a separate part of the business. It’s actually
very interesting for those of you who haven’t encountered
any of the big four companies, which are Deloitte,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG and Ernst&Young. It’s very
interesting to look at their structure and how they have
separate divisions within the company and what they’re in
charge of and how they work together. So if you find some
time, just look it up online and see what that looks like. And
that’s powerful. After working with consulting for some time,
I figured out that top-down is a bit different to bottom-up.
And from where you are now, Richard, and from all your
experience working with both of these approaches, what
would you say are the advantages and disadvantages of each
one?

Richard:

Sure. So the bottom-up approach you can tend to come to a
conclusion a lot quicker. So that’s a big advantage as in the
numbers tell what happened. However, to drive change, it’s
very, very difficult. If you work out something’s wrong, but
you just want to go in there with the numbers and say “The
numbers say that you guys are selling too many of these
widgets because it’s costing you too much money.” Well, the
company’s not really going to listen to you because you
haven’t collaborated, you haven’t talked. They might sell
those widgets for a specific situation where they have to sell
those widgets to sell another product. That’s where it’s got
an advantage in that it gives you a very quick outcome, and
you can tend to make a decision. However, that decision
might not be the best decision in the full context.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

15

	  

The top-down approach, though, where you tend to work
with stakeholders and get the full overall picture, have
workshops, takes a lot longer and it doesn’t necessarily
match the data. However, you come to a conclusion with the
stakeholders. People have their input, they feel like they’re
engaged and you can tend to implement change a lot easier.
But it takes too long. So when you’re working in an
environment where the company is extremely profitable and
they’ve got a long, long time to make a change, such as a
really big university, or the likes of Microsoft or one of those
sorts of companies, you wouldn’t necessarily need to do a
bottom-up or much of a bottom-up approach to get that
hard answer because you don’t need to make a change that
quickly. However, when you work in a company that’s
distressed, you have to make a change very, very quickly.
Otherwise the business could go insolvent. So that’s where
we merge the two, top-down and bottom-up approaches, to
bring stakeholders along so they implement the change but
also get to the answer very, very quickly.
Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, that’s a good summary. And I’ll just reiterate
that again. So the bottom-up approach, which is more the
data-driven approach, the data science/accounting type of
approach, gets you the numbers and gets you results very
quickly so you can tell what’s the problem very quickly but
you might not be able to drive change quick enough because
you just don’t understand the business well enough.
Whereas the top down approach, which is more of the
consulting approach, usually doesn’t get you the answers as
quickly, but at the same time it allows you to understand
the business better and in the long run drive the change. So
the best approach, when you have the resources, is to

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

16

	  

combine the two, some people doing top-down and bottomup. And I have an interesting question then. If you’re doing
top-down and bottom-up and let’s say you have two separate
teams – one is doing top-down and one is doing bottom-up –
and then they come to you with the results and if the results
don’t align, who are you going to side by?
Richard:

That’s where a good project manager helps both the teams
understand where they’re meant to go. It quite often
happens that they don’t align the first time, and you might
remember it in our own projects, and that’s where the
project manager will go to the data scientist and be like,
“Okay, this number doesn’t make sense because of XYZ. Can
you go and rerun the numbers?” I remember a lot of
conversations we had where you went back and reran the
numbers. It wasn’t that your numbers were wrong, it was
just they were analysed in the wrong context, if that makes
sense.

Kirill:

Yeah, I will never admit that my numbers were wrong.

Richard:

They weren’t wrong. So that’s where the project manager can
help shape both of the teams doing the analysis. You know,
acting in silos is never a good idea, and that’s the same with
project teams.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. All right, that was some very solid conversation
and I think we did some rapid fire questions there about
data and consulting and restructuring. From here I would
like to move on a little bit to our relationship as mentormentee. For those of you who are listening to the podcast
and don’t know, I have several mentors in my life and
Richard is one of them. In fact, Richard is the mentor I’ve
had the longest relationship with. It started all back in 2012
when we were flying in and out of that remote location, and

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

17

	  

then we managed to keep our relationship going and I’ve
learned a lot throughout this experience and I feel like I’ve
grown a lot.
So a lot of the time now I get asked “How do you find a
mentor?” “How do you approach a mentor?” “What do you
get out of this mentor-mentee relationship?” and oftentimes I
cannot give answers because it’s case by case for everybody.
It’s person-specific. It depends on what you’re after in life,
what you’re looking for. But at the same time I thought it
would be a good opportunity now that I’ve got Richard on
the podcast to go into a little bit more depth into how our
relationship was structured, so maybe some of you guys can
take away from this and maybe pursue the same thing in
your careers. Let’s kick this off and let’s start with, I guess—
Richard, we were obviously manager and data analyst at the
time. And we could’ve stayed like that. But what do you
think triggered that spark in your eye? (laughs) I’m joking.
What do you think triggered that start of our relationship as
mentor and mentee?
Richard:

I think what I certainly got out of our working relationship
was that your skillset was so different to mine and that I
quickly realized that if I was to get that skillset, I’d have to
learn from you. So I’ve actually learned quite a lot from you
in that regard and I feel that the roles were reversed as well
where my skillsets were very, very different to your skillsets
and you wanting to be an entrepreneur and have your own
business, you quickly picked up that I had that skillset that
I could offer you so you could learn that and apply that to
your future endeavours. I think that mutual respect of our
skillset plus the fact that we both had very similar interests
and the conversation was never dull gave us this outcome.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

18

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. Thank you very much. I appreciate you
mentioning that because I can see how definitely my skills in
operations and business have improved drastically. But I
can also see how after we met and connected, your passion
for data, or vision for data, in your projects has also taken a
bit of a different turn, and you’ve put a bit heavier weight on
that, especially now that you’re hiring data scientists into
your organization. So I’m glad to hear I had some sort of
influence in that area. That’s always good to know.
At the same time, while we were travelling all the time, every
week, we actually stayed at this one hotel – obviously in
different rooms – and in the morning we’d wake up at 5:00
AM, we’d go to the gym together, and we’d have coffee at the
coffeehouse, which I still cannot forget that one time when
with my Russian arrogance—the coffee was late, remember
that?

Richard:

I do.

Kirill:

Yeah, the coffee was late and I knocked on the glass and
Richard was like, “Please, don’t do that ever again. That is so
rude.” Yeah, I learned in that respect as well how Australia
is different to where I’m from originally. We were doing a lot
of things together outside of work. We quickly became
friends. Do you find that friendship helps mentorship or it
detracts from it?

Richard:

I don’t think it impacts it negatively. I think you need to
have a good relationship with your mentor and I think that’s
key. And I think the best mentor relationships—I mean, I’m
a mentor to a number of people and I also have mentors.
There’s always a mutual respect. I think that is naturally
aligned to a friendship type of relationship. No, it’s not an
absolute necessity, but I can’t see it hurting.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

19

	  

Kirill:

Okay. Yeah, that’s good. That’s interesting that you
mentioned that you’re a mentor to several people but you
also have your own mentors. So it doesn’t stop there, right?
It’s not that since you’re a mentor to somebody that means
you know everything in the world. You also have your
mentors. Can you elaborate a bit on that? How do you feel
about having your own mentors and also being a mentor to
others?

Richard:

What I start with when people ask me to be a mentor—just
for the listeners out there, don’t expect everyone to say yes
to being a mentor because it’s a lot of responsibility. You are
shaping someone’s life, and if you don’t feel like you will be a
good enough mentor, you can often say no. So in me
determining whether I want to be someone’s mentor, I need
to feel like they have got something to contribute to me also.
I think if I’m in a relationship where I’m just giving and
giving and giving, it’s very one-sided and I don’t look forward
to the catch-ups. But if I’ve got a mentor-mentee
relationship where yes, I might be giving the majority of the
advice, but also every single time I catch up with them I’m
like “Oh, geez, what they said about X was really good,” or “Y
was great,” or “I really liked how they approached this.” I
might be a bit selfish, but if I feel like I can help them a lot,
and I feel like they can help me a little, then I will certainly
be open to a mentor-mentee relationship. Then on the
flipside, when I’m picking who I want my mentors to be, I
want to have that connection with them. I also want to feel
like I have skills that they will benefit from because that
would mean they’re excited to catch up with me. But then at
the same time, I want them to be able to add materially to
my career. And that’s just the way I approach it.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

20

	  

Kirill:

Yeah, that’s fantastic advice. I never thought of it that way
but it totally makes sense. It totally makes sense now. It
shouldn’t be a one-way, because a lot of people get excited
about getting a mentor and they think it’s a one-way
relationship where they will just get value out of it all the
time. That’s not the case. It should always be a give-andtake. It doesn’t mean that you have to go out and build a
certain skillset that you’re going to be able to share with
somebody. You already have that. Just based on the person
you are, based on the experiences you had, even if they’re
not related to your career, even if it’s just playing the piano
or being an outgoing person, you already have something
that you can share. You just have to find the right person
that is interested in learning from you as well.
Also, that’s great advice for people who are in a position
where they get to ask to be mentors. It is a big responsibility
and you should approach it not just by how are you going to
change other person’s life, but are you going to stick
around? Are you going to be a mentor long enough to change
their life? And for that to happen, you have to get something
out of it too. And it’s not being selfish, it’s just fair, I think.
Yeah, that’s some very interesting thoughts, especially for
people looking for mentors now to digest that and take that
on board. And what would you say, in a nutshell, is the
essence of mentorship? What is mentorship to you, Richard?

Richard:

In a nutshell, one word would be support. What I’ve needed
from my mentors over the years is either supporting me and
approving the direction that I’m going with my career and
the decisions I’m making, or opening my eyes up to the fact
that I might not quite be doing the right thing and direct me

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

21

	  

in the right way. So I see a mentor as supporting the growth
of my career.
Kirill:

Yeah. And not just career, right?

Richard:

You’re right. It could be anything. It could be personal
growth, it could be spiritual growth, it could be—I mean,
how many times have we talked about relationships, family,
non-family? It can be anything that’s impacting on a
person’s life, can be involved in a mentor-mentee
relationship.

Kirill:

Yeah, I totally agree with that. At least half of the time, we’ve
talked about non-career related stuff. I can honestly say that
has really supported me through the good times and
through the bad times. It’s shown me when I’m on the right
path and I’m doing the right thing, and with your life
experience, you look at my situation and you’re like, “Oh,
yeah. You’re making the right decision.” You probably don’t
say that. You say it like “This is why it feels like you’re
making the right decision.” Sometimes you guide me and
you say, “Hey, maybe you should consider these other
things.” I think I’ve told you this before, but one of the
things I really like about our catch-ups, flying to this project
and working in some harsh conditions we got to—in
Australia it’s called “banter”. Is that the right term?

Richard:

That’s right, yeah.

Kirill:

So banter is like when cricket players, they just — not swear
at each other, but they make fun of each other and make
rude comments. It’s just like friendly but still kind of on-theedge type of exchange of comments. You know, we’d get used
to throwing that around, but whenever we got to our
mentor-mentee catch-up and everything, we’d walk to the

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

22

	  

place where we have lunch – we’d usually do it during lunch
– and as soon as we would sit down at the table, it’s like “All
right, now the catch-up is starting.” I could see your face
change. Instantly, you were no longer that Richard who’s a
friend, who’s “we’re just having fun” and just making jokes
all the time, but you were Richard who’s actually listening to
me. I could see how you instantly turned into this person
who is ready to listen to what I have to say. And I really
appreciated it that time. So thank you so much for being
able to switch over into this mode of listening and
understanding what is bothering me and giving me some of
your thoughts on that.
Richard:

No worries. It’s been good.

Kirill:

Yeah, it’s been fantastic. Unfortunately, now that you’re in
Sydney, it’s a bit harder to catch up for us like that. But
still, whenever we can. Last time we caught up was in May,
right?

Richard:

Yeah, last time it was in Sydney, that’s right.

Kirill:

It’s your turn now to come back to Brisbane. (laughs) And
we even have this tradition that when we catch up we catch
up for lunch, and if one time I pay for lunch, next time
Richard pays, then I pay, then Richard pays. So it is
definitely a give-and-take type of relationship. All right, so
hopefully that was useful for those of you who are in a
position of a mentor or looking for a mentor. Yeah, some
very interesting thoughts there.
Now I would like to move on to back a bit to data science, or
data in operations, and just a bit of a rapid fire of questions.
As a manager or leader in operations, what would you say

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

23

	  

has been the biggest challenge you’ve ever had that had
something to do with data?
Richard:

In terms of the technical aspect or in terms of how I’ve used
data?

Kirill:

I was actually going for how you’ve used data, but technical
aspect is also a pretty interesting question as well. If you can
answer both of them, that would be great.

Richard:

Sure. One probably leads the other. In terms of the technical
aspect, quite often we come into companies that don’t have
sophisticated IT managers or data people involved and so
the systems are a shamozzle, and they are a bolt-on, or
there’s a million spreadsheets that don’t talk to each other.
And the biggest challenge I think I’ve ever faced was an
Australian company turning over close to $10 billion. To put
that in perspective, that’s probably 18,000-20,000
employees, and they still used Excels for everything.
Everything.

Kirill:

No way.

Richard:

Yeah. And every department had a different Excel. And every
department reported based on this Excel. There was nothing
to pull it all together. This was just an ultimate, siloed,
horrible business. Trying to come in, obviously, with the way
the commodities had taken a turn for the worse – things
changed very quickly for this company and they needed
answers but it was almost impossible to find the answers in
the timeframe we needed, basically. So that went from being
8 operational people and 2 data scientists to me being the
only operations person and everyone else a data scientist.

Kirill:

So you went from 2 data scientists to 7 data scientists.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

24

	  

Richard:

I think it ended up being 7 to 10. It was closer to 10 towards
the end of it because we needed one on every side and we
needed to get down to the raw data entry people and it was
just – it was hard. However, in that time—that took 6 weeks.
It normally takes 2 weeks, but it took 6 weeks to come out
with an output that allowed me to make a decision. But
what was really interesting is because the people running
the business were all operational people and never had to
understand the data, trying to convince them to make the
decision because the data said so was so hard. They were
such instinctive executives that having to go through the
process of data, me and my traditional operational selling
style, which is not very detailed – it’s got a little bit of detail
but not a lot – they couldn’t understand it. When I got a data
science partner to come in and talk through every single
step that they did along the path to come to the answer, they
started to get it.
So that’s where the balance of using data to help drive
decisions was really, really crucial, and where partnering
with the data scientists just made the biggest difference with
that engagement. If it was me doing it the traditional way, I
wouldn’t have gotten anywhere.

Kirill:

Classic! That’s a very, very peculiar or very traditional
example of executives not getting it. But that’s crazy!
Everything was in spreadsheets! I just can’t even fathom
that.

Richard:

Well, I think you remember one company we worked with
where most of their stuff was in spreadsheets or across four
different accounting systems.

Kirill:

Yeah.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

25

	  

Richard:

It is bizarre how some companies operate.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. All right, that was a great example. Next
question I had, and I don’t know if the answer will be
different, because that seems like a huge win for you—it was
exactly that. What is the biggest win in your career that
you’ve ever had where you’ve actually used data to your
advantage? Would you say that was the win, or do you have
another example for us?

Richard:

Actually, the single biggest win where data completely
turned the whole engagement was—I don’t know if you
remember, but you, me and Keith had to prepare a board
report for a pretty hostile meeting. We had about a day and
a half to do it.

Kirill:

Oh, yeah.

Richard:

And the national CEO and the global COO from our side and
then the equivalent on the other company’s side, which was
also a multibillion dollar company, were going to be in the
meeting. Fortunately, we had worked very hard for them a
couple of months earlier to pull all the data together and
have really nice spreadsheets and analyses and databases
and everything automated so that we could pull analyses
very, very quickly and we knew it was accurate. So this
meeting happened and my equivalent on the other team’s
side came out blasting, saying how much money we owed
them. I think they were saying we owed them $40 million in
the next week and saying how terrible we were. It was just
so one-sided. And then the CEO of the company we were
working with got out a report and said “Well, no, that doesn’t
sound right,” put our numbers in front of them, and that
number turned out to be that they actually owed $5 million

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

26

	  

to our company. So every meeting after that,
automatically had the respect of everyone in that room.

we

Kirill:

I remember that. I don’t remember the exact details because
it was obviously a much bigger feat for you. Your career was
probably on the line in that meeting!

Richard:

Correct.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. That was insane. You know, looking back on
those days, gives me so much—what’s the word? When you
reminisce something, you get nostalgic. It was so much fun.
It was like a game of chess, you know? Like, this company,
and this company, and then they’re sorting out their
business, and we’re on one side, and there’s the equivalent
of you on the other side, who is going to get the facts right
and so on. Yeah, it was so much fun. Do you miss that time
or do you still have that—?

Richard:

I’m still doing it. I’m still having that much fun. I love it.

Kirill:

Yeah, I can imagine. You’re still in that environment. You
just made me realize now that I actually miss it a little bit,
but what I don’t miss is the hours. Stepping aside a bit from
the rapid fire questions, you’re still working. You’ve been in
the consulting space for how long now?

Richard:

About 12 years.

Kirill:

12 years! That’s probably the longest now out of all the
guests that I’ve had on this podcast that have been in
consulting. You’ve been working 12-hour days, weekends, at
nights, in the morning, all over the place, on holidays, and
you’re still doing it. What keeps you going? How come you
don’t get tired of this?

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

27

	  

Richard:

The biggest thing for me is I learn. Pretty much every job I
learn something new. I’ve still got a lot to learn in my career.
I mean, I’m quite young, I’m only 32 and I started this when
I was at university, so that’s why I’ve got the 12 years under
my belt. Every single engagement, I learn something new.
And every engagement then allows me to create something
new. So my offering is very new and it’s the only one in the
market. And the only reason I’ve been able to do that is
because I keep learning. So the day I stop learning is the day
I’ll stop doing it and I’ll do something else.

Kirill:

Good answer. It’s definitely worth the trouble you go through
to learn all the things that you’re learning right now. Okay,
next question: What is your most favourite thing about being
able to use data in your business decisions?

Richard:

It saves a lot of time. A huge amount of time. I could not do
what I do if I didn’t have the data scientists working with
me.

Kirill:

Great answer. I think one of the best answers I’ve had to
that question. Okay, so from where you’re standing at and
what you’ve seen about data and how you use data in
operations and how you’ve seen it being used in businesses,
where do you think the field of data science is going, or the
influence of data in business, and the part that data plays,
the role that data plays, in businesses? What should our
listeners look out for to prepare for the future and to adjust
their careers accordingly?

Richard:

I’ve actually thought about this a fair bit over the last few
years, Kirill, so I might have an answer that’s a little bit
weird. So one of the things I’ve always wanted to do, and
there’s a few people doing it, is to have a problem-solving
tool that links data and the ERP systems to operations more

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

28

	  

effectively. So what I mean by that is at the moment, if you
want to install an ERP system with a large company, you
have to spend 10, 20 million dollars, whatever it is. You have
loads of consultants in there, it takes up all this time, and at
the end of the day, it actually doesn’t align to the operations
and what operations actually need in the business. You
know, one of the reasons Oracle was such a success is
because they were the first ones to sort of align the ERP
system or the data with operations. So what I would love to
be able to do is to develop a problem-solving tool that helps
very automotively, or whatever the word is, work with
companies and the ERP systems and have the two line up
without having to spend the $20 million+ to implement it.
Kirill:

Sorry for interrupting you. What is an ERP system for those
of us who don’t—?

Richard:

Enterprise Resource Planning tool. So it’s basically your HR,
to manage payroll, to manage paying accounts, to manage
your accounting, it manages projects. It’s basically any IT
system that you have in your company. It’s the systems that
produce the data that you guys analyse.

Kirill:

Okay. So you think one of the things that’s going to change
how data is going to impact large organizations in the future
is that these ERP systems—there’s hopefully going to be a
way to implement them much faster than spending $20
million on consulting fees and so on.

Richard:

That’s just the tip of the iceberg. I also think these systems
are actually going to do the jobs of a lot of the people who
use it today. For instance, there’s no longer going to be 3
people doing payroll or people doing accounts payable; it will
be a robot analysing the data and determining if it’s right or
wrong based on other operational data that it’s learned from

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

29

	  

its other system in the company. I think the technology is
going to get so much smarter and the coding is going to get
so much better that these things — within 99% accuracy —
will be able to do the job of basic admin people in that role at
the moment, which is—at the end of the day, who does it.
That’s just one example of where I think data is going to go.
It’s just eliminating those areas, time constraints etc. in
business.
Kirill:

Very interesting advice. So for those of you listening out
there, I just want to put this in perspective. This is advice, or
an opinion, coming from a person who’s been 12 years in
business operations, who’s turned around dozens, probably
hundreds of businesses, and who’s seen how they work
inside. So Richard right now is outlining a very evident (to
him) pain point of these companies. That means that one
day, somebody’s going to address it sooner or later. It might
be you, somebody who is listening to this podcast. The fact
of the matter is that one day, there will be a company that
solves this problem and it will bring efficiency into the
businesses, it will bring cost-savings, but at the same time it
will also bring a lot of redundancy, so a lot of these people
that are actually fulfilling these roles will become redundant.
That is unfortunate, but that is the way of progress. That is
something to think about, whether you’re in one of those
roles and you might want to start looking into ways you can
adjust your skillset to get a promotion or a different job or
somehow still be valuable to your company. Or maybe you’re
going to be one of those people that is going to be
implementing those things in the business that increase
efficiency. So it is a very valuable insight from somebody
who’s been working in this space for such a long time.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

30

	  

Richard:

I was just going to say anyone who works out how to fully
automate the system is going to be a very, very successful
person.

Kirill:

Yeah, totally. Okay, thank you so much for that. And before
we wrap up this podcast, you had something you wanted to
share with our listeners. What was it?

Richard:

Sure. I’m actually aggressively hiring to build my team in
Sydney and Melbourne at the moment, and one of the key
skillsets we’re looking for are data science skills, so if there’s
any listeners out there that have basic accounting
knowledge but also a data science background or skillset,
please get in contact with me because we’d love to chat to
you.

Kirill:

Fantastic! So there you go, guys. Right on this show, right
on the podcast, Richard is sharing with you some
opportunities for your career, especially if you’re in
Australia, in Sydney or Melbourne. If you have a background
in data science and some experience and a bit of accounting
knowledge, get in touch with Richard. You’ll be able to get
his LinkedIn and maybe any other contact details he shares
on the show page and we’ll share that at the end of the
podcast. So make sure to check that out. This might be your
golden ticket into the world of a beautiful and fantastic
career. Thank you so much, Richard. How can our listeners
contact you, follow you or find you if they want to get in
touch about this opportunity or just look at how your career
progresses throughout the years?

Richard:

Sure. They can send me an email. It’s pretty easy, it’s
richard.hopkins@pwc.com, or they can shoot me a note on
LinkedIn. They can find me through your profile or they can
just look me up.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

31

	  

Kirill:

Awesome! And we’ll definitely leave those details on the show
notes page. Get ready, prepare yourself to be bombarded
with emails. And one final question: What is your one
favourite book that you can recommend to our listeners for
them to become better data scientists or just improve their
careers or even personal life?

Richard:

Well, it’s interesting because I was thinking I was going to
recommend some really cool “Security Analysis” book by
Benjamin Graham or some data science book that I read
trying to get my skills up, but I realized you guys are
probably a lot smarter than I am in that space. But it goes
back to that listening skill that I think you learn as you go
through the professional world. So the best listening book
I’ve ever read is “How To Win Friends and Influence People”
by Dale Carnegie. I think if there’s anything that can help
with life, not data science specific, but it will also help with
that, that book probably had the greatest impact on me. So I
recommend getting that.

Kirill:

Thank you so much. I’ve actually been recommended that
book, I don’t think on this podcast but by other people as
well. It’s on my list. So “How To Win Friends and Influence
People” by Dale Carnegie. All of you guys listening to this
podcast, definitely check it out. Thank you so much,
Richard. I really appreciate you taking the time out of your
busy day to join us on this podcast.

Richard:

Not a problem. Thanks, Kirill.

Kirill:

So there you have it. I hope you enjoyed this episode. And if
you’re in Sydney or Melbourne, Australia, or if you’re
planning on relocating to those cities, then definitely get in
touch with Richard. This could be such a great opportunity
for your career. For me personally, working with Richard

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

32

	  

was a very mind-opening experience and I learned a lot. It
was a great opportunity for growth, both professionally and
personally. And for takeaways from this episode, it’s really
hard to decide, right? We talked about data science on one
hand, then we talked about the top-down and the bottom-up
approach, and all those other things, and at the same time
we also talked about mentorship.
So I’m going to highlight two takeaways from this episode.
First one is probably the difference between the top-down
and bottom-up, and how they can be used in combination,
and the advantages and disadvantages of either approach.
And in terms of the mentorship side of things, definitely a
great takeaway for me was something I didn’t think about
before – is that a mentor-mentee relationship has to be a
two-way relationship, so you can’t just expect your mentor
to constantly be giving you value and adding value to your
career and to your growth, you have to be giving something
back. Even if it’s not as much, it still should be something
that you have to offer your mentor. So there we go. That was
the episode with Richard Hopkins.
If you’d like to get the show notes, transcript for this episode
and all the other materials mentioned in this show, then go
to www.superdatascience.com/16. There you will find
everything, including the contact details for Richard, where
you can get in touch with him and follow his career. And on
that note, I’m going to wrap up today. Make sure to follow
Richard on LinkedIn. I’ll see you next time. Until then,
happy analyzing.

Show Notes: http://www.superdatascience.com/16

33

